Hi everybody, I'm Will Styler and I'm going to be your instructor this quarter for Linguistics 101, Introduction to the Study of Language.
I'm really excited about this. Not just because I like teaching and because I like language, but because Ling 101 is the time when you realize that,
oh my god, linguistics is cool! Right? Because it is. It truly, deeply is. And you might not believe that yet.
You may not even know that you're a linguistics major yet, but trust and believe. We'll get you there.
And Ling 101 is how we're going to do it. This course is designed to just teach you about how we study language as linguists.
More specifically, how we look at capital L language rather than just languages, rather than Spanish or Russian or something like that.
So, that's what we're going to do this quarter and it's going to be a lot of fun.
But today, actually, what I want to do is talk to you a little bit about how this course will work.
The class is online this quarter. You will not need to be in San Diego to complete this course.
There's no in-person component to it. Everything will be done by Zoom and using activities on your own time.
And so, as a result, this will be a little bit different than you may be used to. And as a result, I want to walk you through that.
In terms of the course itself, it will meet only once a week. When you signed up, it had two time slots a week,
but we're only going to use one of them for a required class. And that's Thursday, 12 to 1.20 p.m.
It'll be held in Zoom. The link will be posted in Canvas and all time zones that I give you throughout the quarter are going to be in U.S. Pacific time, which makes sense, right?
So, you will only be responsible for showing up on the Thursday time slot, 12 to 1.20, and there we'll actually do activities.
We'll do material. It's going to be awesome.
But on Tuesdays, the other scheduled course time will be a help session.
Myself, as well as some of the other members of the instructional team will be on hand to answer questions,
to offer assistance, both one-on-one and sort of in a greater room sort of thing.
Think of it as like a mega office hours.
And we will also, each member of the instructional team will have office hours independently in which we can work with you one-on-one.
Or if you have something that is maybe a little bit more private in nature, you know, you need an exception because something going on in your life,
you can come to my office hours independently and work on things there.
So, who are we? What is the teaching team?
Well, I'm Will Styler. I am a phonetician in the department.
And I specialize, and what that means is I study speech.
I'm interested in what it is that you're doing right now, well, that I'm doing right now,
as I'm making little vibrations that you're understanding.
And then I'm also interested in how you're understanding them.
Speech perception is probably my area of biggest interest.
But I also have a strong computational background and have done a fair amount of computational linguistic work.
And mostly, I love language and I love teaching.
And so, one-on-one is, I'm super excited to be teaching this class.
So, that's me. Here's the IPA pronunciation of my name here, in case you want that later on.
You can also see my pronouns, my office, although I won't be in it this quarter,
as well as my Zoom office hours, Fridays 11 to 1.
I believe they're going to be the final time. This may change.
The syllabus, by the way, is a website.
You can see up at the top there, there's a link, wstyler.ucsd.edu.
Or just, if you want to make it easier to remember, savethevowels.org.
But the syllabus will always be there and it will always be up to date.
If I make any changes, they'll show up there.
So, anyways. But this is where you can find my Zoom link.
You can find my office hours. You can find my email.
Although, if you're going to ask course questions, use the Canvas discussion boards
or come to office hours or the help session, rather than sending emails.
It's just better. That way, more people can benefit from your questions.
I will fill in the graduate instructional assistant stuff off to the side there.
But at the moment, actually, I don't know exactly who they're going to be.
That hasn't been decided yet. I wanted to get the ball rolling on filming things.
We'll also have two undergraduate instructional assistants,
Gloria and Allison, who are both excellent.
And will both be helping us, well, to learn more.
And I'm yet to collect some of their information as well.
So, sorry about that.
So, the course website is savethevowels.org. You can get that.
We'll be using Canvas for discussions.
I'll be posting some of the videos on Canvas,
although I'll probably be putting them on YouTube more often than that,
as well as to give you files, as well as to manage grades.
You can get there using Course Finder there.
We'll be using Gradescope for homework. This is a free thing.
You won't have to spend any additional money to complete this course.
So, it is completely free.
You'll just log in and you can submit homeworks and quizzes and things like that there.
You'll get information about that probably the first week of class, maybe week zero.
We'll be using Zoom this quarter for all class sessions, all office hours.
And I have some guidelines for online classes right here.
You should click that link and it'll be awesome.
Because it'll tell you what my expectations are for an online class.
And although they're not super unusual, I think it's useful for you to know.
And I do have a study guide for this class.
And the study guide will hopefully be helpful for you as you're going through
and trying to figure out what's important, what's relevant here.
Course materials. There is a textbook that I can recommend.
Look, I'm going to level with you.
I don't like any of the textbooks available for Ling 101.
Each of them have their own good, bad, and really unfortunate.
But the one that I like most is this Introduction to Language by Frumpkin, Rodman, and Hyams.
It's probably the best one I like now.
But that said, it's really expensive.
And right now, I feel bad about doing that to you.
So, the book is optional.
All of the readings, and they're just going to be like we're reading about syntax,
or we're learning about syntax.
Good. Read the syntax chapter.
They're recommended, but they're not required.
You're welcome to read from the textbook.
You'll get something from reading it, but I'm not requiring you to have it.
I'm not using any exercises.
You don't need to purchase it.
And if you do purchase it, please, just buy the book.
Or you can probably get it online someplace.
Either way, I'll have a couple of copies on reserve,
but don't plan on buying the textbook thinking it's going to be needed for this class.
That's not how I'm running things.
Course schedule.
Okay.
Weeks are listed by the Monday they start on.
So, if I say, oh, this is due Sunday, that means a full, well, damn near seven days to the following Sunday here.
With the exception of week zero, which actually is a weird thing that we've got this quarter,
which is just the day, September 28th, each week starts then.
All of the due dates are fixed.
I'm going to switch things around from time to time.
I may change, oh, I'm going to do this lecture on this day, this lecture on this day.
I'm going to just try and, or this activity, that is.
I'll try and be flexible, but I will never change your due dates on things.
And the due dates are actually very easy in this class.
You will have something due every Sunday at 1159 p.m.
This will either be like a Canvas discussion.
It will be maybe something on Gradescope.
It may be a full-on homework.
But you will have something due every single Sunday.
You will also, every week, have a check-in due Thursday at noon.
So, this is immediately before the class session, basically.
So, you will have a quiz on Gradescope every Thursday before the class session,
just to make sure that you've been watching the video.
Make sure that you're checking things up.
So, yeah, that's what's going on.
The idea, though, with this class is that you'll come to class on Thursday for the class session.
So, the first week, we'll be talking about what Ling 101 is
and how to succeed as an online student more generally.
Like, how is it that we can adapt to this weird new world?
And so, we'll talk about that the next week.
We'll do some introduction stuff, and we'll do some data analysis, which will be fun, et cetera.
But during the rest of the week, you have freedom.
You can work on the assignment due on Sunday.
You can work on the quiz.
You can watch the lectures.
And I'd really encourage you to watch the lectures early.
Watch them ahead of time.
They're not short, necessarily, but it's a good way for you to kind of get familiar with things.
You can do reading, et cetera.
So, each week, we'll have listed the videos that you need to watch.
In this case, there's going to be introduction to Ling 101,
and these will all be posted on the YouTube or on Canvas, but you'll have videos there.
And each one of these links here is actually a link to the slides.
So, if you're curious about, oh, I want to copy this part out of the slides,
you can just go there and do that.
So, that's available.
So, that'll show you what videos you need to watch.
Then you'll see the class session, which is what we'll be doing in class that week.
We'll talk about the due date for whatever is due this week.
So, the first week, week one, you have a discussion due, a graded Canvas discussion.
Second week, you've got a second discussion.
Third week, another discussion.
And then as we scroll down, we'll start seeing actual homeworks.
So, this day, during week four, that Sunday, you have homework one.
Yeah, homework one phonetics is due.
And then every week, you have the content check-ins.
So, this will show you kind of what we're planning each week.
And each week kind of has a theme and a topic.
You know, introduction to linguistics, introduction to language, what sounds are there,
what sound patterns, structures of words, et cetera.
So, we'll go deeper into all of these things each week.
And so, there are the total of ten weeks.
And then there will be the finals week.
During the finals week, there is not a final exam scheduled.
Instead, you will have a final homework.
Homework six is effectively a take-home final exam.
I'm just grading it similarly to other homework, so I'm calling it a homework.
But anyways, that will be due during your final exam period.
But everything else will be asynchronous that week.
So, and by the way, just so you know what I mean by that,
if I say synchronous, that means we're all together in the same place at the same time.
So, like the Thursday class sessions are synchronous.
Every other work is asynchronous.
You can do that whenever you would like.
You can do it at 2 a.m. I really don't care.
I'm not judging.
Right?
So, yeah, that's the schedule.
That's how you read it.
This area right here, the student support and learning interaction, it's really important.
And I have a whole listing of resources that you as a student, oh, come on,
that you as a student can use.
I'm still getting all this set up and ready here.
But a list of resources, there we go.
And these resources include things like my online course guidelines,
letters of recommendation, discussion post rubrics,
and then a bunch of self-help and support resources,
things like mental health resources through CAPS,
the Caret, SARC, OSD, just a bunch of places that you should be familiar with
because they can actually help you out.
So I encourage you to check out that area of the website
if you're curious about how any of this sort of will work.
So there's that.
In terms of the course itself, like I said, we're talking about what makes language work.
How does language work?
It's one of the most important things we do as humans, but how does it work?
And so I talk a little bit about how to succeed, but it's pretty straightforward, right?
Watch the videos.
Learn the content.
Pay attention.
Don't get distracted.
Attend the sessions on Thursday.
Come to office hours when you need to.
Think carefully about how you learn because that's really important, right?
And that's a different question.
How do you learn is sort of different from, you know, and especially online,
you might have to ask that question all over again.
And then starting things early.
Don't procrastinate on homework, et cetera.
And effective self-care is maybe more important now than ever in this world.
So make sure to do those kinds of things,
and that will make sure you have a good experience in the class.
But remember that this class is collaborative, right?
We all have the same goal.
I want you to learn linguistics and get a good grade.
Really.
Seriously, I do.
I would be very happy if all of you earned great grades in this class,
and you want to learn linguistics and get a great grade.
Hey, we're on the same team, right?
So I very, very much want us to kind of keep that in mind.
In terms of the grade, the grade is made up of four categories of things.
You've got 55% of your grade comes from homeworks,
15% comes from the weekly check-in quizzes,
15% comes from participation in the class,
and 15% from graded discussions.
Standard UCSD scale.
This is boring.
Homeworks are submitted through grade scope.
We drop your lowest homework.
That means if you bomb homework one, that's okay.
You'll get points for the next homework, basically.
What this does mean, though,
is I really don't want to hear about late homework.
Unless you've got a doctor's note, unless you've got prior arrangements,
something like that.
I'm not doing makeups.
I'm not doing, oh, my God, can I?
I'm not accepting any late work.
You drop the lowest homework assignment, and that can be a zero.
So as a result, if you have a problem with homework,
drop it like it's hot, right?
No problem there.
You're also welcome to work in groups for this class,
especially online.
That makes more sense than ever.
That said, you need to turn in your own version of the homework.
Every assignment that you submit needs to be unique.
It needs to be your own.
But you can definitely collaborate.
You can definitely talk about it.
You'll just have to disclose who you work with,
who you collaborated with, et cetera.
So there's that.
And then scanning your work doesn't actually mean scanning.
I mean, look, you can use your cell phone to do it, right?
But you have to do it a little bit better than just, like,
taking a picture of a piece of paper bent over your knee.
Then I'll cry and not grade it,
and those two things don't work well together.
So read that link about scanning your work properly.
And then the final homework is a take-home exam.
We mentioned that already.
The weekly quizzes are easy.
They're 10-question quizzes.
I don't expect, or I'm sorry,
I fully expect that most of you will get 100% on these every week.
But it's just there to make sure that you're doing the lectures,
that you're not, like, falling behind.
Like, oh, well, you know, I'll catch up with those in two weeks.
It's just once a week, low stakes, short.
Try to get them, make sure you're doing that.
Course participation.
So, look, linguistics is analysis, right?
We are studying language.
And the way that you study language
is by picking at it in different ways,
whether you're looking at the sounds that make up a word,
whether you're looking at the patterns that make sounds move,
what parts make up words or sentences, etc.
We are doing things to language.
And this is an applied skill.
It's not just like, oh, well, language was discovered at the...
Well, it's not even a thing, right?
You're not just learning dates.
You're not just memorizing terms.
We need you to be able to do things.
And as a result,
you are going to need to come to class and do them.
Every week in our synchronous section,
we're going to be doing analysis.
We're going to be doing meaningful discussion
that makes you think about parts of language.
And so you will be awarded one point per session
that you're present and participating in class.
Oh, by the way, we dropped the lowest quiz as well.
I thought I should mention that too.
And we dropped the lowest participation grade.
But anyways, so we will give you one point
for showing up each week in class.
The way that you get this point is to attend the session,
to arrive on time, leave only when you're dismissed,
show up awake, clear-headed.
Please don't just like log on
and then immediately zonk back out.
I'm like, no, please don't do that.
You'll want to stay on camera.
You'll want to stay ready to mic up if you need to.
I mean, certainly I get it.
Many of you live in chaotic circumstances.
And maybe someone's vacuuming as you're trying to talk.
But by and large, be ready to turn on your mic
if we need to have a discussion, right?
And make sure that you're actually participating.
It's real, real easy to pull up Animal Crossing
on another screen, right?
But let's try not to do that.
If I can't play Breath of the Wild during this,
you can't play that.
Anyways, I digress.
And then ask questions, follow course policies, et cetera.
Again, we're dropping a day,
so that shouldn't be a problem.
And if you miss a session,
and if you miss more than one,
just go ahead and fill out this missed session assignment.
If you go on Canvas, under files,
you will be able to basically complete
the same activity asynchronously.
And it'll be a little bit of extra work, absolutely.
But it can get you that point back.
That said, I understand that many of you
are dealing with, well,
pretty exceptional circumstances right now.
Some of you might not be in San Diego.
Some of you might not be in the Pacific time zone.
And so if coming to class regularly
presents an exceptional burden to you,
do email me.
Do let me know.
And we can try and figure out a way
to make things sort of equitable and whatnot for you.
And similarly, if you end up getting sick for a few weeks,
we can certainly play with things.
But if you miss a session, though, generally speaking,
you should try to be at every session.
And if you miss one, you'll just complete that assignment
within a week of the missed session,
and everything will be fine.
So that's the participation grade.
It's very easy to get.
I expect everybody to get 100% on this.
But nonetheless, there it is.
And then finally, the graded discussions,
where you'll write a post responding to a question,
and then you'll make two posts
responding to your colleagues' opinions and questions.
So it should be pretty easy, right?
So you'll do three posts.
And for that, you'll get four points,
and everything will work out.
And we're going to automatically drop
the lowest discussion grade.
The extra credit, there are two approaches you can do.
One is you can come to my office hours
sometime before week seven.
And this can be for course-related reasons,
just like, oh, I don't know how the course works.
Or, oh, hey, Will, I'm lost about this homework assignment.
That'll count.
Or you just come in, introduce yourself.
Tell me, hey, I love linguistics because X.
Or, hey, I'm not sure that I love linguistics yet because X.
And I'll talk to you about it.
And we can just have a grand old time.
But you'll just fill out a quiz on Gradescope about that,
and it'll be awesome.
But that gives you a half a percentage
point of extra credit.
The other thing you can do is to participate
in a SONA experiment.
This is the online subject pool.
And you can, in fact, do this online.
And if you can't find that, or if you'd rather not
participate in one, there is a way
to basically summarize a study.
Email me to get more information about this
if you decide you'd like to go that route.
But the experimental thing is actually kind of cool, right?
Kind of fun.
A couple of other course policies
I want to talk to you about while we're here.
One of them is class session recording.
We're going to be recording the synchronous sessions.
This is going to be useful for students
who miss the session so they can hear answers
to questions and things like that.
And by the way, we're going to start
every single session with a question and answer period.
So feel free to bring questions to that.
But anyways, so we will be recording that
by entering the sessions.
You know that.
Asking questions.
Please, please ask questions.
We want to help you.
Genuinely, we all want to help you.
And so if you're having trouble understanding something,
ask us.
We'll help.
But do that in office hours.
You can do that on Canvas discussion boards.
You can do that during the help sessions.
There are lots of venues to do this.
But again, don't email us course content questions
or homework questions.
If you've got questions, throw them on Canvas.
Regrades.
So by and large, well, one of the big things
to keep in mind is that any grade that is older
than a week is fixed, right?
There's not going to be anything changing after a week.
So what that means is that after you get
an assignment back, whether that's a quiz,
whether that's a homework, et cetera,
if you read through it and if you think
there's been an error, then you can use
the Gradescope interface to submit a request
for a regrade there.
But you must do this, again, within seven days.
After seven days, it's all final.
And so just keep that in mind.
And that means, and the other thing is
it's a good idea to look back at your assignments
anyways because you learn more
if you're paying attention to your assignments
to your work.
Academic integrity, I mean, look,
don't be a cheater, right?
I mean, easy.
But you can, I've already given you an opportunity
to collaborate on some of these things,
but you should be the only person working
on your copy, and every answer should reflect
your own work and your own learning.
And there's the full policy down below.
Respectful discussion is really important here.
We're gonna be talking about language.
And you can't untangle language and culture.
You can't untangle language and the situation
in which the language is spoken.
So this will lead to discussions of things
like gender, of race, sexual orientation,
religion, politics, nationality.
You're welcome to share opinions,
but be mindful and respectful to other people
in the class.
And more specifically, as you're kind of thinking,
as you're planning responses, et cetera,
think about being kind.
Think about being respectful.
Use the same kinds of language with them
and the same tone with them that you would want
them to use with you.
And focus your discussion on ideas
rather than individuals.
You're welcome to say that you don't think
somebody's analysis is right, but you say,
hey, I don't think your analysis is quite right,
rather than saying, you're an idiot.
Because, well, then you're a jerk, right?
So you wanna make sure that you're doing that.
And as we're thinking about this,
as we're evaluating conversations,
we're gonna be focused on the impact
that your words have on the individuals in question
rather than your intention or your motivation.
So please, please, please be careful and be kind.
Above all else, be kind.
The world is messed up enough right now,
the best thing we can do for each other
is to be kind to each other.
In terms of accommodations, just let me know
in the first two weeks of class.
There really shouldn't be that much that comes up,
just because it is all mostly asynchronous,
mostly online, but something,
let me know as quickly as you can,
especially with due dates and things like that.
But there's that.
If you add them class late,
I've got some policies here,
but basically we wanna make sure
that even people who show up late
do the same amount of work, right?
So that's where that comes from.
Email me if you've got questions there.
Other course policies, seriously,
it's important to me that you are proactive.
If something's going on in your life, let me know.
Because what that does is it kinda gives me the heads up.
And that way, if you come to me a week later and say,
hey, I need to skip town suddenly,
and I can't continue completing obligations,
that way I kinda have it in my head already.
And it's like, okay, great.
I'm sorry to hear that.
We can work on this.
I'm much, much more likely to give permission
for something ahead of time
than to forgive it later on, you know,
if it's already happened, right?
So please, please contact me as soon as you can
if you know something's going on.
And I don't necessarily need details,
but that's something to consider.
It doesn't really, talking to yourselves in lecture,
it's a little weird in the Zoom world, but yeah.
I will use whatever name or pronoun you'd like.
The best way for you to do this for me
is to change your name and pronoun in Zoom.
So you can do something like Will Styler, he, him,
or something like that.
It doesn't really matter,
but please, please forgive us if we forget.
And especially if one of the systems
keeps updating things otherwise.
We'll do our best, though.
You will be hearing a lot of puns in this course.
I'm gonna flat out tell you,
this is a problem that I have.
I can't turn it off.
There's no hope.
So if you have trouble with puns,
this is not a class you wanna be in,
then finally all this can change.
And I've got some acknowledgements here
and then some generalized academic policies
that you might be dealing with elsewhere in your life
for accessibility, academic integrity,
classroom behavior,
which I think is also Zoom room behavior,
religious accommodations,
and then discrimination and harassment.
So anyways, this is the syllabus.
The answer to all things is in the syllabus.
Seriously, there's a reason that college professors
show up to conferences with T-shirts that say,
read the syllabus,
because we all go,
ah, they never do.
And we all wish they do,
so read the syllabus.
But we just kind of did already,
so now you know.
And there you go.
So that's what we've got for week zero.
For next week, you'll be reading,
and you can check this out by the course schedule,
which is right here.
So this week, you'll watch this video.
Next week, you'll watch Intro to Linguistics,
and we'll move on from there.
So anyways, thank you all so much
for registering for Ling 101.
Tell your friends.
Sounds like we've got some room.
And most of all,
I hope that you have a really wonderful day,
and I hope that we have a great quarter together.
We're going to do our absolute best
to make this online class
an awesome class in whatever format it is.
So have a wonderful day, everybody.
Goodbye.
