Okay.
Hi, everybody.
Today, we're going to start down the path of syntax, and we're going to do that, actually,
in three parts.
Today, we're going to focus a little bit on the kind of intuitions that underlie syntax.
We'll break sentences down into trees later on, but why?
Why would we even bother with this?
Why is syntax a field, generally speaking?
What does this win us?
Why should this exist?
Then next time, we'll get into actually building a syntactic grammar, or at least a very basic
syntactic grammar for English that lets us account for the reason why sentences look
like they do.
And then on the following day, we'll talk a little bit more about some of the syntax
stuff that goes a little bit above and beyond what we're going to be able to cover in 101.
So first off, old meme, but a good meme.
So let's go on ahead and jump into syntax, how sentences are built.
So our plan for today is grammatical relations.
First, just what does this concept mean?
We'll talk about why we need syntax.
We'll talk about constituency and constituency testing, and why this leads us to think about
sentences as having a hierarchy rather than just being linearly ordered, as we might expect.
And then that'll bring us into syntax trees generally.
So okay, we've got a sentence like this.
We have Joanie, who is here, and then we have Dieter down here.
These are both Bolivian rams.
They were wonderful little fish.
But Joanie chased Dieter.
It's a good sentence.
It happened all the time.
Joanie was chasing Dieter left and right.
And so the question, if I give you a sentence like that, Joanie chased Dieter, you know
instinctively that Joanie here is chasing Dieter around.
The question is, how did you know that?
How do you know who did what to whom in a sentence?
And so this is grammatical relations.
The way that a language chooses to mark who did what to whom is grammatical relations,
fundamentally.
That's the main question you ask.
If I give you a sentence, how do you identify what roles people have in that sentence?
And it's really important, right?
If you don't know who did what to whom in a sentence, you've got major problems.
And languages have different strategies for this.
Sometimes you can kind of guess, right?
I could give you the sentence or the sequence of words, ate, will, and veggie burger.
Independently, you would be able to make a pretty good guess that I am the person who
ate, which is a verb, a veggie burger.
Because ate can never be not a verb.
There's not a thing that's an ate or something like that.
Will is considerably more sentient than your average veggie burger.
And therefore, I've got a much better chance of eating the veggie burger than the veggie
burger has of eating me.
So you can guess from that.
Some languages use inflectional morphology.
We talked about this already, where you use a morpheme that marks the subject, the doer,
in this case, and the object, the thing that's being affected, and that way you can do that.
We already talked about this in Russian with case marking.
But often, as is the case in English, this is accomplished using word order.
And English uses word order to mark grammatical relations.
If I say, Will ate the veggie burger, we know based on that word order there that I
am the eater and the veggie burger is the thing being eaten, and the eating is the main
verb here.
Similarly, if I say, Joanie chased Dieter, we know that Joanie was the chaser and Dieter
is the fish that was being pursued.
If I say, Dieter chases Joanie, then everything changes, right?
Because now Dieter is in the place in the sentence where we would expect the thing doing
the chasing to live, and Joanie is in the place where the chased object and or fish
goes.
Andres waved to Katie.
Again, this gives us information.
We know that Andres was the one with his hand up, and Katie was the person being waved at,
right?
Or Will insulted Michael Bay.
We know that I am the person doing the insulting because of the Transformers movies, and Michael
Bay is the person, well, we know that intuitively, but Michael Bay is the person who is being
insulted there.
Sorry, Michael.
So we know how this works, and we know that this word order is important.
But the thing is, it's not just order, right?
You know, you could picture a world in which you said, oh, okay, well, the thing that is
first is the doer, the second word is the verb, and then the other words after that
are the subject.
But that doesn't happen.
Because I can say, the veggie burger was eaten by Will.
And that means the same thing, right?
No one is confused.
And it's not just on the basis of semantics that we know this.
This could be a big, mean, evil veggie burger that's a mutant and eats humans, but we know
that in this sentence, the veggie burger is the thing that I ate, right?
And similarly, it was the veggie burgers that Will was eating.
We've got that expletive it again, but it was the veggie burgers that Will was eating.
Still, there's no ambiguity.
These three sentences mean roughly the same thing.
And what did Will consume on that dark, dark night?
A veggie burger.
In this case, again, it's a different verb and things like that, but the ordering is
fundamentally different.
So it's not just order in the sentence.
It's not just about which thing comes first.
Because here, the veggie burger is first, but it's still being eaten.
And here, it's second.
And so the big question is, okay, if it's not just word order, what could it be?
You can change the ordering and it still makes some sense, but you can only change the ordering
in some ways, because then it won't make sense.
Word order matters.
So if I say ate Will the veggie burger, that's weird, right?
Unless Will the veggie burger is a particular veggie burger named Will, it doesn't make
a whole lot of sense, right?
Or similarly, if I say Joanie Dieter chased, then that doesn't make sense either.
Unless Joanie Dieter is a person, it probably isn't, right?
Will burger veggie ate.
Again, this is not a sensical sentence.
You might be able to intuit it, but it's not clear.
And so that's kind of problematic, right?
You can move the word order around and it still has the same meaning, except when you
do and it doesn't, right?
And then you can move things around further.
So I can say Will ate the veggie burger, could say Will ate it, so I just disappear
the veggie burger, I put a pronoun in its place.
That still works, right?
The ordering isn't that weird.
Will ate what?
Or what did Will eat?
In this case, the pronoun, in this case interrogative, is in one position, and then I can switch
it around and it still works, right?
So this is a word order change.
But I can't say what did Will eat it for some reason.
That doesn't sound okay.
And then things get ambiguous, right?
I could have a sentence like Will likes ambiguity more than most people.
And that's actually an ambiguous sentence.
Think about it for a second.
What are the two meanings that this sentence right here can have?
One of the meanings is that I like ambiguity more than most people like ambiguity.
The other meaning is that I like ambiguity more than I like most people.
So I don't generally like people, but I like ambiguity.
And so either way, there's an ambiguity there.
So those are your two different meanings.
So clearly then, this is complicated, right?
It's not just word order, but words, orderings matter.
There's some kind of a grammar here.
And this is why we have syntax.
We have syntax to describe how any of this still works, even though you can change the
order, but you can't change the order sometimes.
And the ambiguity is there, but it's not always there.
It's a thing.
Syntax, generally speaking, is the study of the structure of sentences and utterances.
Syntax is the thing that lets us understand how any of this stuff works.
It tells us what determines the order and the arrangement of the words and sentences.
There's an N there.
You just can't see it.
It's hidden.
But determines the order and arrangement of words in sentences.
What orderings and arrangements are grammatical in a language, and how do we identify the
meaning of words given their ordering?
All of these questions are really, really important for being able to generate new sentences,
for being able to, as a speaker, evaluate the grammaticality of sentences.
You need to know, well, how does the ordering change when you have a different context?
That's important.
How do we identify the meanings of words?
All of these things are really important.
They're big linguistic questions.
And syntax is huge within linguistics.
It is a gigantic subfield.
If you're at the LSA, Linguistic Society of America convention, the syntax parties are
big, right?
There are a lot of people doing this.
It's very, very popular.
It's very, very broad.
It's very, very deep.
People go way into syntax.
And it is also very much not my area, right?
When I do syntax, it's computational, and computational people don't do syntax in the
way that most syntacticians do.
So, you know, do keep that in mind.
But still, it is gigantic.
There are a lot of syntacticians out there in the world, and we have several of them
in the department, actually.
We have great syntacticians, and they will teach you in 121 all about syntax.
But for the moment, my goal is just to get you basic exposure.
And so let's start from the basics.
The biggest concept within syntax, and sort of the thing that leads us to a feeling that
there's something here, is constituency.
So a syntactic constituent, simply put, is a group of words that seem to go together
in the structure of a sentence, right?
Constituents are always a continuous string of words.
This is really important.
A constituent has to be a group of things that are directly next to each other in a
line.
So it can be this chunk of three words here.
It could be, well, actually, in that case, it wouldn't be a constituent, but it could
be one single word, or it could be a larger chunk of words, et cetera.
But there are no skipping of words.
These have to be continuous chunks.
But more importantly, these are chunks that when you split them off, make sense, right?
So we have intuitions about how things can be split properly.
We know what breaks in the world are good.
And we know that even if other breaks are possible, they shouldn't always be done.
So let's break off a piece of syntactic structure and check our intuitions, right?
So which of the following is a complete constituent in the sentence, we'll track the wild veggie
burgers through the forest?
So in this case, you have a couple of different options here.
One of these things is a piece that belongs together.
And another of these things is not a piece that belongs together.
So A would be burgers through the...
Nope.
Oh, dammit, I just gave you the answer.
Burgers through the is one choice.
Track the wild is another.
C is the wild veggie.
D is wild veggie burgers.
And E is we'll track the...
Listen to these.
Repeat them to yourself and ask yourself, which one of these is a valid chunk?
Which one of these goes together?
So the correct answer is going to generally for most people be wild veggie burgers, right?
We'll track the wild veggie burgers through this forest.
This feels like a complete chunk.
The other ones really don't.
Which of the following is not a complete chunk in the sentence?
Same sentence, actually.
A is we'll B, track the wild veggie burgers through the forest.
C the wild veggie burgers.
D through the forest.
And E veggie burgers through the forest.
So for most people, the answer is going to feel like E. All of these other things.
Feel is a complete chunk, right?
Even though it's a chunk of one, it's a chunk.
Track the wild veggie burgers through the forest.
Yeah, that seems reasonable.
The wild veggie burgers, that's a chunk.
And through the forest.
Yeah, that's a chunk.
But veggie burgers through the forest doesn't make as much sense.
That doesn't feel as good.
So a lot of people have pretty good intuitions about these things.
But I want to give you more formal methods for checking these things.
And these are called constituency tests.
These are grammatical tests.
These are things that you can do to sentences, manipulations that determine whether something
is a valid constituent.
There are a lot of these out there.
But can a syntactic operation apply to this particular chunk of text?
Can it work on this chunk?
So there are three tests we're going to teach you here today.
The first one is substitution.
Can you swap this chunk out for something else?
The second is standalone answers.
Could this be an answer to a question on its own?
The third is movement.
Can this chunk move on its own someplace else in the sentence using the grammar?
So okay.
Test number one is substitution.
Can we replace the element of a sentence with a placeholder?
If you have a chunk and you can swap it out for something else, then it is probably a
constituent, right?
Any time you can replace a chunk of sentence with something else, it is a constituent.
So let's think about it this way.
The indignant kitten eyed my veggie burger with disgust yesterday at dinner.
So I can replace chunks of this sentence.
We can look at, for instance, he eyed it, right?
The indignant kitten gets replaced with he.
So that whole thing must be a chunk.
And then my veggie burger with disgust yesterday at dinner, you could just go it, right?
That could work.
The indignant kitten did so.
This replaces everything after, well, including eyed.
So eyed my veggie burger with disgust yesterday at dinner.
That replaces that whole chunk, right?
So that must be a chunk.
The indignant kitten eyed what?
So that would replace my veggie burger with disgust when would replace yesterday at dinner.
So thus my veggie burger and yesterday at dinner, these must be constituents.
The kitten eyed my veggie burger how yesterday at dinner will give us with disgust.
So all of these things are giving us chunks, right?
And all of these things are giving us legal chunks.
These are actual things.
And given you can do other kinds of replacement, the obligate carnivore replaces indignant
kitten, accurately so, but eyed by dinner.
And so I can replace veggie burger with dinner.
So again, that's a chunk with disgust then.
So at dinner gets replaced by then.
All of these things are ways to do this.
Can we do think for a second about, for instance, kitten eyed?
Is there any way and try it work with it?
Is there any possible way that you could get that you could replace just kitten eyed?
And it is by the way, completely and totally cheating to replace it with something like
feline looked at because that's not see what you're doing there.
Yeah, chances are there is in fact, I pretty much guarantee you there's no way to replace
these.
And so you can't replace some chunks, but you can replace other ones.
And that's a really good test for constituent.
So here's another one.
Your intrepid and phonology loving TA saw the great horned owl that will had mentioned
in passing while they were standing in the hallway last week before class last night
shortly before leaving campus to go to Red Robin to nerd out about the phonological processes
and eat French fries.
Okay, so what can we replace here?
Large chunks of this actually could just say she saw it then.
So she replaces your intrepid and phonological phonology loving TA it is would replace the
great horned owl that will had mentioned in passing while they were standing in the hallway
last week.
Oh, I'm sorry, last week before class.
And then then gives us last night shortly before giving a leaving campus to go to Red
Robin nerd out about phonological process and eat French fries.
All of those big old chunks I just replaced our constituents, all of those are valid holes,
so to speak, that I can hold with a WH, right?
These are our whole chunks that I can remove.
She saw it last night before all that.
So last night shortly before all that replaces leaving campus to go to Red Robin and nerd
out about phonological processes and eat French fries.
Again, that whole chunk must be a constituent here.
She saw the great horned owl that will had mentioned then.
So in this case, then would be in passing while they were standing in the hallway last
week before class.
So that whole chunk gets replaced with then shortly before that.
So in that case, that would be that would literally replace leaving campus to go to
Red Robin and nerd out about phonological process and eat French fries.
As you see, this works right.
And this can replace very large chunks.
Constituents can be very small.
They can be very large.
But still, if they can be replaced like this, their constituents.
So there are lots of really good words for testing this.
Like WH words, interrogatives.
So who saw the owl last night?
Or who said the owl?
So who is a good thing to replace what, where, when, how, why, et cetera.
So you could say, for instance, she never climbed the tallest mountain in Africa in
2018.
So what could you put in there to replace tallest mountain in Africa to see if that
would work?
You would say she never climbed what in 2018?
And then to get in 2018, she never climbed the tallest mountain in Africa when?
So again, you can swap those things out.
Pronouns are also useful here.
So for instance, your desire will has no desire to meet the director of those awful modern
Transformers movies.
So in this case, you could replace he with well, your instructor will could be swapped
out for him.
And this could be swapped in for he.
So there you go.
Adverbs of place and time are really useful for these kinds of things.
So for instance, I grew up just south of Denver, Colorado, in a boring suburb near
a reservoir.
So this gives me, I could just use I grew up then, I'm sorry, I grew up there.
In this case, you would replace this with there.
There's no temporal thing.
But it was I grew up just south of Denver, Colorado, in a boring suburb near a reservoir
starting in 1985.
Then I could say then at the end to replace the starting in 1985.
And then do so do so we'll grab a verb because in English, you can use do so to replace an
entire verbal thing.
If somebody says, you know, oh, I'm thinking about, I don't know, I'm thinking about going
for a walk.
Oh, you should do so that sounds fun.
Do so replaces going for a walk.
So in this case, Jessica ordered fried ice cream at the restaurant, and I did so too.
In this case, you can say Jessica did so and replace that.
And in this case, I did so is actually replacing ordered fried ice cream at the restaurant.
Both of those things are there.
So all of these things are really good ways to test substitution, to test for constituency
using substitution put more closely.
So if you can replace something with a placeholder, chances are it is a constituent.
In fact, it is a constituent generally.
And if you're unable to, it's not a constituent.
So that's one of the tests.
This works.
And in many cases, that'll be all the tests you need.
You'll try it and you'll be like, Oh, yeah, I can swap out a when easy constituent, yay.
But there are other tests that we can use like standalone answers.
So for instance, a string of words that could be an answer to a WH question is constituent
or is a constituent.
And another way to think about this, a very closely related test is actually surprise.
If you wanted to be surprised at an isolated chunk of a sentence, you could repeat it back.
So we'll work on both of these.
So Robert the enchilada holic thoughtlessly purchased a $1,000 gift card to Chiquita's
Mexican restaurant last week.
Okay, there's a lot there.
What can we do here to do this?
To do these standalone answers, what I can do is I can replace chunks of it, or I can
ask, I'm sorry, I'm going to ask questions that would pull out a chunk of it.
So I could say who bought the gift card that would pull out a given chunk.
For most people, Robert the enchilada holic would get pulled out of there.
And similarly, using the surprise thing, you could say, wait, Robert the enchilada holic.
So if you're trying to express that you're incredulity, that'll do the same thing.
What did he buy?
So in this case, that would pull out a $1,000 gift card for Chiquita's Mexican restaurant.
Probably not last week, right?
Where was the gift card to?
Would give you Chiquita's Mexican restaurant.
That would be the answer.
So he bought a $1,000 gift card to Chiquita's Mexican restaurant?
Or just Chiquita's Mexican restaurant?
You'd pull that whole chunk out there if you're surprised, right?
When did he buy it?
Last week.
Gives you that entire chunk.
He bought one last week?
Again, that chunk is something to ask questions about.
What did Robert do?
He thoughtlessly purchased a $1,000 gift card to Chiquita's Mexican restaurant last week
and so forth.
How did he buy it?
This would actually pull out thoughtlessly, right?
Interesting.
So all of these things are constituents, right?
If a chunk can serve as a standalone answer to a question, that's further good evidence
that it's a constituent.
Or put differently, what can a chunk that's a constituent do?
Serve as a standalone answer to a question.
Anyways, so that's the second test.
The third test is when you move items together.
There are lots of things that we can do to move things around in a sentence.
Think of all of the various ways that you could say something like, Will yeeted the
remote out the window.
You could say something like, Out the window, Will yeeted the remote.
Or the remote was yachting out the window by Will.
Or it was the remote that Will yeeted out the window.
All of those things are changing the order of the sentence.
They're all grammatical sentences, at least as far as I'm concerned.
You might agree or disagree with yachting, but you'll get there.
Language change has got my back there, right?
But anyways, all of those things are valid moves, and I've moved chunks.
So if you can take a chunk of the sentence and move it as a single chunk, if you can
move it together, that chunk is a constituent, right?
The resulting sentence does need to be grammatical.
Just saying, again, no cheating.
So nice try.
Eugene sold his watch collection to the Pine Thugs.
So in this case, how do we deal with this?
What could we move here?
Well, one thing that you could do is something like, His watch collection is what Eugene
sold to the Pine Thugs.
So this would isolate the chunk, his watch collection, right?
Or to the Pine Thugs, Eugene's watch collection was sold.
So in this case, we've moved to the Pine Thugs out to the front of the sentence.
This one is a little questionable for some folks now.
It kind of comes across as very old-timey, but it's definitely, it has worked in the
past.
Sorry, voice is giving out, I've given, I've recorded too many of these today.
But anyways, to the Pine Thugs, Eugene's watch collection was sold.
Sold his watch collection to the Pine Thugs, Eugene did.
That one's, that one's feeling real old-timey there, but still, we pulled out that entire
big chunk, and there you go.
Pine Thugs are who Eugene sold his watch collection to, or maybe the Pine Thugs, either way.
Pine Thugs are who they sold the watch collection to.
All of these things demonstrate that these chunks here at the front are actually constituents,
right?
And you can move them elsewhere in the sentence, but as long as you can move something syntactically
from one place to another thing as a complete unit, that thing is a constituent.
So if you can move a chunk together, it is a constituent.
And this is how we evaluate constituency in syntax.
So let's go ahead and test it out.
Which one of these is not a constituent in Marla, uh, Michael and Carla, also known as
Marla, founded an innovative new dermatology company last month?
A, Michael and Carla, B, founded an innovative new dermatology company, C, an innovative
new dermatology company, D, an innovative new, E, last month.
Which one of these is not a constituent?
So try each of our tests on each of them.
Go ahead and do this on your own.
Pause if you need to.
All right.
So, thinking about this, there are a couple of things we can do.
So we can, let's see, Michael and Carla, let's test this one first.
Can we move it?
You could say something like, an innovative new dermatology company was founded last month
by Michael and Carla.
Single chunk, moved it, we're good, right?
Okay, let's try founded new in, uh, founded a new innovative dermatology company.
We can replace that whole thing with did so, right?
Michael and Carla did so last month.
Boom, replacement, constituent, an innovative new dermatology company.
Could we do there?
Well, let's try a question word.
So for instance, what did Michael and Carla found last month?
An innovative new dermatology company.
Great.
How about last month?
This one's pretty easy.
You've got a couple of options there because you could just move it to the front, right?
Like last month, Michael and Carla founded, or you could do a question.
When did they found it?
Or you could replace it.
You could say founded a new dermatology company then.
All of those things could get last month alone, but an innovative new, that one doesn't fly.
There's no way for us to make this one a constituent and that's not great, right?
If you're trying to make that a constituent, so therefore this would not be a constituent
in this sentence.
So what do we call these constituents as we're working with them?
We've now found good methods to actually identify constituents in the world, right?
We can now go through and we can look at these constituents one by one and we can figure
out, okay, this is one, this is one, this is one, but how do we label them?
Because in linguistics, labeling things gives us power, right?
It gives us understanding of the world.
So what we do is we name these constituents after the head of their phrase.
So what I mean by that is that there is a lexical category for every word, right?
We can talk about that.
We talked about that last time.
We talk about the head of that phrase.
So if we look at the sentence, the angry squirrel stole the mixed nuts from Walmart.
The angry squirrel is headed by a noun.
The most important part of that is the noun, right?
The is modifying the squirrel.
Angry is modifying the squirrel.
The squirrel is kind of the root, right?
It's the main part.
So it is headed by a noun.
So that is a noun phrase.
It is a phrase that is headed by a noun.
Stole the mixed nuts from Walmart.
All of that is modifying the stealing, right?
It's telling us the mixed nuts from Walmart are what were stolen.
So that whole thing is headed by stole, the verb.
So that would be a verb phrase.
It's headed by the verb.
A prepositional phrase is headed by a preposition.
So a chunk like from Walmart, which we can move, by the way.
We could say something like, um, you, uh, oh, uh, what did the angry squirrels or where
did the angry squirrel steal the nuts from?
You could say from Walmart.
Or they stole the mixed nuts where?
From Walmart, et cetera.
So we can pull that prepositional phrase out there.
And then the whole thing put together is a constituent, right?
That is one valid chunk, and we call that the sentence, or S.
So we have now NP, noun phrase, VP, verb phrase, prepositional phrase, or PP,
and then the sentence, which we're going to label with S.
So all of these are phrases.
All of these little constituents that you're going to pull out are valid phrases.
And so that's useful.
Constituency, though, is very important for meaning.
Meaning is crucial as we're doing constituency because it has a role.
It means things about ambiguity.
It means things about ambiguity.
That was ambiguous.
It has a role in determining what things mean that helps resolve ambiguity.
There you go.
That's English.
So we need more honest politicians is a very easy way to, it's a nice sentence, right?
So this could have two different meanings.
This is ambiguous.
This could mean we need more politicians who are honest.
So there is a need for additional politicians, and I want them to be honest.
As opposed to the other meaning, which is we need to exchange our existing politicians
with ones that are more honest.
So we don't need more politicians overall.
We just need the politicians to be more honest.
Or maybe we want the politicians we have to become more honest,
but we don't need more politicians.
The difference here is actually one of constituency.
There are two ways to break this sentence up.
One has more honest as a chunk.
The other has more honest politicians as a chunk.
So more honest as a constituent has the meaning of whatever politicians we have,
we need their honesty to go up.
And the second one has the meaning of we have a need of politicians
and we want them to be honest.
So by thinking about the constituency, we resolve the ambiguity here.
And the meaning changes depending on how you break that sentence up.
This is called a structural ambiguity.
And we'll be doing this over and over and over again.
So we can use our constituency test to help us here.
If we used, for instance, substitution, we could see we need our politicians
to be like that, right?
We need our politicians to be more honest.
That would pull out more honest.
So if that's the read, then this constituency test would work.
But if I were to do we need more of them,
this allows us to have honest politicians as a constituent
and works with the more politicians read.
So the substitution tests actually help us to resolve that ambiguity.
Or more specifically, depending on which test is accurate,
it gives us a sense of which the actual structure is.
We can use standalone answers too.
What kind of politicians do we need?
More honest.
Versus what does Congress need more of?
Honest politicians.
So we can use these, again, to pick out the relevant constituents.
And that would help to resolve the ambiguity
if we know the actual meaning, right?
And then movement, of course.
We need politicians who are more honest.
We've moved more honest as a chunk here, right?
And then if there's one thing we need more of, it's honest politicians.
In this case, honest politicians gets pulled out, right?
So we can, again, use these constituency tests
to get a sense of the underlying structure.
And depending on the actual structure, we
get a sense of what the actual meaning is here.
Structure gives us meaning.
This is a really important thing that we'll see in syntax,
as well as in semantics later on.
But the structure of language gives us the meaning of language.
And constituency turns out to be really important.
We do seem to understand constituency as language speakers, right?
We understand what's going on in constituency.
And syntactic rules make constant reference to constituents.
That's all we're going to be.
I mean, when I give you your list of syntactic phrase structure rules,
oh, which is backwards, hey, OK, either way, webcam.
When I give you that list of rules, it's
going to have S, NP, VP, et cetera, all going down the side there.
So not only is it intuitive, but it's useful,
as we're making a grammar that deals with syntax.
And no matter what syntax looks like, and there
is a lot of debate as to what syntax actually looks like in the mind.
What human syntax actually is is controversial.
But no matter what, everybody agrees constituency is a thing.
It is an important part of it.
So thinking about constituency is going to be constant.
It's going to be huge over and over again.
OK, OK, we get it.
We know, Will, constituency is a thing.
But where is this coming from?
Why do we have this intuition?
Why on earth is constituency a thing?
If these are just linear ordered words, then
shouldn't any chunk be pulled out?
Well, language is hierarchical.
This is a big claim.
It's a big theoretical claim.
This is not something that we should just kind of let go completely,
like, oh, yeah, I assume so.
But we have really good evidence for it over and over again.
And we've seen this already.
We started off the quarter talking about phones, right?
Talking about individual speech sounds in phonetics.
Then we combine those together into units like syllables, for instance.
And they are subject to rules at the phonological level.
We combine those syllables into morphemes.
No, well, not always.
But the morphemes are made up of these syllables, by and large.
And mind you, there are languages that don't have syllables.
But still, we have small chunks of sound.
And then we have larger chunks of sound.
Those combine into morphemes.
Those words, I'm sorry, those morphemes combine into words.
And then words combine into phrases and constituents.
This right here is hierarchical, right?
And then phrases combine to form bigger phrases.
And then phrases combine to form sentences.
Bigger phrases combine to form sentences.
And then we have rules that tell us how this works.
We have rules that allow us to combine words together,
that allow us to combine phrases together,
and allow us to combine even bigger phrases together to make sentences.
And in the end, we end up with actual sentences.
So we are not able to do this.
We're not able to say, this is a sentence.
This is its structure.
It's flat.
We have these words.
They're in this order.
We are done here.
That would make syntax tree drawing a lot easier, right?
But it isn't accurate.
Because we don't have any sense of constituency.
If we look at this, squirrel stole the is just as possible a constituent
as the angry squirrel.
When in reality, we have these strong intuitions that, no, that doesn't work.
We would never get squirrel stole the moving.
We could never replace it in a sentence.
No, that's not the feeling.
But if we think about it hierarchically, we can start to get a better sense of it,
right?
We can pick out this stole the mix nuts from Walmart chunk.
If we do just a little bit of hierarchy, we can get there.
And we can actually get the fact that mix nuts is a separate constituent.
Stole what from Walmart?
The mix nuts.
So we can grab that chunk.
Stolen from where?
From Walmart.
We can get that pee pee chunk over there.
But there's still more to it, right?
Because the angry squirrel isn't the smallest chunk, right?
We could move something around.
For instance, we could get, how could we swap that out?
The what stole the mix nuts from Walmart?
Swap out angry squirrel.
So we actually need to go a little deeper here.
So we need to give us another level here.
We need angry squirrel to be isolable.
We want squirrel to be isolable.
The angry what stole the mix nuts?
There we go, squirrel.
And so as a result, we end up building a bigger tree that looks like this,
that has chunks at a bunch of different levels, that has a noun phrase,
has this end bar.
And we'll talk about this later on.
Don't worry about it too much right now.
But it has an intermediate level that lets us grab angry squirrel.
The mix nuts from Walmart as a chunk here.
We have from Walmart as a chunk.
We have mix nuts here.
We have stole the mix nuts from Walmart.
All of those chunks are present for us to just reach up and grab one off.
I can just say, I want the angry squirrel.
Okay, grabbed it.
That doesn't work well.
My arm isn't transparent, it turns out.
But anyways, so we can grab whatever chunk of this we want,
as long as it is hanging off one node on the tree.
Does that make sense?
Actually, I can't see you, so I can't tell.
Hopefully it makes sense.
I believe in you.
That makes sense.
Okay, so we need to go deeper.
But there's actually an ambiguity here,
because it could be that the squirrel stole the mix nuts from Walmart.
For instance, I was sitting in the park.
Yesterday I went to Walmart and I bought a big old thing of mix nuts.
And I was sitting in the park today, far, far away from a Walmart, and
the squirrel just ran up to me and stole them mix nuts, just dragged them off.
And so in that case, the squirrel stole the mix nuts from Walmart.
That's one big chunk.
What did the squirrel steal?
The mix nuts from Walmart.
But there's another read, right?
Cuz it could be that the squirrel stole mix nuts from the Walmart.
Like the squirrel walked into Walmart, went past the old person,
to the mix nuts aisle, grabbed them, and then ran out the back door with the mix nuts.
That could be the case as well.
So in that case, we would have a different structure,
where the squirrel stole what?
The mix nuts.
The squirrel stole from where?
From Walmart.
So in this case, we would have it isolated a little bit differently here.
We would have stole the mix nuts as a single chunk, from Walmart as another
chunk, and that whole thing as a chunk above that, right?
And so now we have stole the mix nuts from Walmart.
And the from Walmart modifies, it's affecting,
it's describing this whole chunk here, the whole stole the mix nuts bit,
rather than modifying just the mix nuts, right?
And so we're able to see this ambiguity, this structural ambiguity,
we're able to see in the sentence structure.
We're able to see it from the syntax trees.
And so these are, as I just mentioned, syntax trees.
These are a representation of this hierarchical structure of sentences,
of this structure that starts very small and grows bigger, that grows wider.
And so these are trees.
They're upside down, but they're trees, right?
They start very low, and then they go, they branch out.
And we draw them like this because it's a little easier, right?
But there's no reason we couldn't go upwards.
But a syntax tree just gives us a representation of that structure.
It captures this idea of constituency, that I can break this chunk off,
I can break this whole chunk off, but I can't just get, for instance,
the angry without taking squirrel with it, right?
So that's why we do syntax trees.
And they can be very, very simple, like this one, I ate.
So I is a noun phrase, it's also an end bar, we'll get there.
And it's a noun, so I is the first part, that's the noun phrase.
Then the verb phrase is just a verb, which is ate, simple sentence, I ate, great.
I see you, actually I don't at the moment, but you see me.
But I, noun phrase, verb phrase here contains see you,
cuz that's a chunk.
I could say I did so, that replaces this whole chunk here.
So I see you, see is a verb, and then you is another noun phrase and bar noun, cool.
The dog chased the cat, we know that the dog is a chunk,
we know that chase the cat is a chunk, we also know that the cat is a chunk.
The dog chased what?
The cat, okay, great, that's a chunk.
So we can then do this verb phrase here,
which has a noun phrase down below it, right?
So we're able to make these trees to capture these intuitions about
constituency and show the structure.
And you can go bigger, you can say,
I saw the big sweet dogs from La Jolla with fleas.
So, right here, there's actually an ambiguity, right?
Actually, we'll go there later on, I think that's in the next video.
But nonetheless, this gives us really big chunks, right?
The big sweet dogs, that's a chunk.
The big sweet dogs from La Jolla, that's a chunk.
And with fleas is a separate chunk.
And those modify, the fleas are on the big sweet dog from La Jolla,
rather than from La Jolla with fleas,
which is a different city from La Jolla, generally speaking.
It's like La Jolla, but less expensive.
I could afford to live in La Jolla with fleas, right?
So nonetheless, that's a thing.
So La Jolla with fleas is not a place, but
the big sweet dogs from La Jolla is a thing, and they have fleas.
So this gives us kind of intuitions about constituency, right?
And the fun thing about these is that they represent structure
independently of words.
Although the formatting is a little bit different,
if we look at these two sentences, they are exactly the same structurally.
Here, S goes to NP, VP, good, S goes to NP, VP over there.
NP goes to debt determiner, and then N bar N, debt determiner, N bar N.
And then on the other side, you get the VP goes to a VNP, yep, that's the case.
And then NP goes to debt N bar, N bar goes to N, perfect.
So these have exactly the same sort of situation here.
They are the same structure, even though the words of them are different.
But in practice, they are very similar, too.
Like, semantically speaking, it's the subject did something to the verb.
Hey, cool, syntax and semantics are related, great.
And different structures imply different meanings.
Here's a good example of a structural ambiguity.
In fact, this is kind of the example.
I saw the man with the telescope.
There are two meanings of this.
One is I saw the man, and he had a telescope.
I looked outside my window, and I saw the man with the telescope there.
He was looking at the stars, or something like that.
The other meaning is that I saw the man using the telescope.
So I have a telescope.
I'm looking out the window at the guy using my telescope here.
I don't know, that's probably not how you telescope,
unless it's like an old pirate scope, right?
But I saw the man with the telescope.
I used the telescope to do the seeing.
And so let's look at this syntax tree here, and
think about what is modifying what.
I'm gonna show you, well, actually, in this case, I gave you the answer above.
Whoops.
But you can get a sense of why it is that these are parsed out this way.
Because saw the man is a single chunk together, and
then with the telescope is a separate chunk, and it's modifying the seeing of
the man, as opposed to the other one, which is I saw the man with the telescope.
Where the man with the telescope is a noun phrase, right?
It's the whole thing.
I saw who?
The man with the telescope.
As opposed to, I saw who?
I saw the man.
And then how did you see him?
With the telescope.
In this case, how did you see him?
I don't know, probably with my eyes, right?
So these are two different sentences in terms of meaning,
even though they are written identically.
And the syntactic phrase structure rules that we have here, I'm sorry,
the syntactic phrase structure gives us a good sense
of what these differences actually are.
So all of these things are really cool.
One thing to note, there are a bunch of ways to draw a syntax tree.
This is one thing that we as a field absolutely will probably never agree on,
right?
If you just Google, draw a syntax tree, you will find a billion theories.
Every different website is going to do it a little bit differently.
And the best approach to doing this is a huge subject of theoretical debate.
Like seriously, fistfights have happened over this in our field.
This is a very, very real thing.
We are teaching you a very small subset.
The rules that I'm going to give you next time, in the next video, like this,
this is a very small chunk of grammar for English.
And in fact, you're going to find that it's woefully inadequate for
a number of English sentences.
But this is a set that's pretty uncontroversial.
Everyone's like, yeah, I guess that mostly works, right?
When you go deeper into syntax, when you take, for instance,
Ling 121 for syntax, you will find out a great deal more about one particular
theory, you will go deeper into it and you'll be able to handle a lot more of
But for the moment, I'm just getting you the basic intuitions here.
But you will not find consistency about how to draw a tree on the Internet.
So if you just Google this, you're going to have a bad time.
Because you can leave some things off.
You can drop some of the nodes in there.
You can specify more things or less things.
You can put different things at the top.
Please, please, please, as you are doing the homeworks,
as you are doing the assignments, use only the materials we're giving you.
Please, please, please, please, please.
Use the rules that I give you.
Use the things that you find on Canvas.
And if you're having trouble, talk to us.
Come to office hours.
Seriously, come to the help sessions.
We would love to work you through this.
But you're going to get more confused if you start Googling,
how do I draw a syntax tree?
Because you're going to find 15 different syntactic traditions,
all telling you how to draw their trees.
And chances are, it's not going to be identical to what we're doing in this
class.
So please, please, please, we are here to help you.
We want to help you.
So to wrap up here, we know that languages use word order to code
grammatical relations.
We know that there is much more to that than just ordering.
We know that constituents within sentences are a thing.
And we know that they're derived from some kind of a hierarchy in the sentences.
And we can use these tree diagrams to understand the nature of that hierarchy,
to reconstruct what the sentence must look like in order to give us these
intuitions about constituency.
For next time, we're going to talk about how to make these syntax trees and
what these rules actually look like.
And that should be a lot of fun.
So thank you all very much, and I will see you for the next video.
