Okay, hi everybody. Today we're going to talk a little bit more about syntactic phrase structure rules.
Last time we talked about basic intuitions for syntax, namely that, wow, it sure seems like sentences aren't flat.
Now we're going to think about how that might actually work in a grammatical framework.
We're going to think about how could we write a rule that describes the structure of these noun phrases, verb phrases, prepositional phrases, that kind of thing.
So today our general plan is going to be to, as soon as I get my remote working here,
our general plan is going to be to talk about phrase structure rules, what those do for us, why do we even bother with them.
We'll talk about tree planting generally. How do you make a tree in a linguistic context?
So last time we talked about constituents as a raw idea. We gave you things like noun phrase, verb phrase, prepositional phrase.
These chunks that sure feel like they belong together and these chunks that can move together.
These chunks that seem to have some identity within the language. And so we talked about all of these things.
Now the question is, okay, we know the world of syntax isn't flat.
We saw from last time the world makes more sense if we think in terms of trees, if we think in terms of hierarchy.
And we saw good examples of this, both from the existence of constituency itself to the idea of ambiguity,
giving us further evidence that, you know what, this can't be analyzed as a single string of words all at the same level.
And by the way, the rest of the world isn't flat either, but we shouldn't have to cover that anymore. I think we had that.
Anyways, let's think a little bit more about the structures that we see within the syntactic world.
And the way that we're going to do that is using phrase structure rules.
So one way to think about this is, again, we've been talking over and over about grammar.
And grammar as in the thing that is in the speaker's heads that allows us to do language, right?
And we've thought about this in terms of phonology. Those two things can't belong together.
It's wugs rather than wugs.
This is yet another one of those cases where we have some intuitions inside our mind about what a noun phrase looks like in English.
So for instance, the big strong rhinoceros works, right? That feels okay.
The big quickly rhinoceros?
Not quite so much. That doesn't fly. We're not allowed to have an adverb in the middle of this.
The strong charged rhinoceros doesn't work at all, unless charged is an adjective.
But if this is a verb, that can't work. You can't have a verb inside the noun phrase in that particular way, right?
All of these things weren't legal.
Same thing with a prepositional phrase.
I saw her outside the barn. That's fine, right? No problem.
I saw her outside fall over?
No, because the prepositional phrase needs to have a noun it's relating things to, not a verb.
I saw her outside beautiful. Aw, but not grammatical.
And so even verb phrases have constraints.
Things like, I hugged the small kitten. I small hugged the kitten.
No, that doesn't work. The small needs to go with the kitten over there, right?
I hugged gently the kitten?
Ehhhh, I've had people tell me good, I've had people tell me bad.
It's a thing, right?
And sentences absolutely have rules in English.
I can say Sam sent Amanda to the store.
But I can't say sent Sam Amanda to the store.
I can't say Amanda Sam to the store sent.
I mean, I can, but no one understands me. It's not grammatical English, right?
Unless Yoda you are, in which case, it's good to go.
But there are lots of rules about these phrases that are inside our heads as speakers, as listeners.
We understand, okay, that doesn't belong in a noun phrase.
But how? What's useful there? What can we do with it?
Well, this is grammar, right?
And so this is one of the things that a good theory of syntax will do for us.
It generates all of the sentences that speakers of language think are grammatical.
So what we want from a good theory of syntax is to have a system that is able to create a sentence that will be grammatical.
If I know, for instance, that I have the word penguin, I have the word polar bear, and I have the word chase,
that will give us the biologically improbable sentence, the penguin chased the polar bear, right?
Mostly because they're on different sides of the planet.
Anyways, I digress.
But we want a theory of syntax that can generate all of the sentences that speakers of a language think are grammatical.
And we want it not to also generate things that speakers of a language think are ungrammatical.
This second one is really important, right?
Because I can generate, I mean, look, if I want to create a machine that guesses all of your birthdays in the room,
I could do it just by cycling through every birthday.
And it would work, it would be 100% reliable, but it would not be a good thing, right?
Instead, we want to constrain it.
We want to make sure that it's producing only the output we want.
And so these two things combined give us a generative theory of syntax.
And in fact, this idea here, the fact that something can generate a grammar,
or a theory of grammar, that is, can generate all of the good stuff and none of the bad stuff,
this is one of the ideas behind generative linguistics.
You'll hear that phrase over and over again.
A generativist is trying to design theories that will generate the good stuff and not generate the bad stuff.
And so we're going to give you a very, very, very basic approach to this.
Now, huge disclaimer time.
Syntax is gigantic.
Like I said, it's a subfield, it's huge, and there's so very much literature here.
And we're only teaching a very small part of it that will handle a very small number of sentences.
The rules that I'm giving you do not suffice for more complex sentences,
because very often you need things like movement.
You need to be able to move things around.
You need more complexity than any of these rules will allow you to do.
He says, holding up a paper you can't read, than any of these rules will allow you to do.
Right?
And so the rules that you have do not suffice if you're looking at more complexity.
The handout that I've put on Canvas will show you the rules that we do use.
There are other sets of rules out there.
Oh my gosh, there are other sets out there.
So trust nobody else, not even the book.
I don't even particularly love the rule set the book uses.
It's very similar, but they've got some things in there that we don't need right now.
So use the handout we're giving you.
Also, realize that I'm going to be saying, oh, you know, yeah, that's true.
That's a reason.
For instance, you might give me a sentence and I'll say, oh, that's a great sentence.
We can't handle that one yet.
I'm going to be saying this.
Don't worry about that a lot.
No, no, no, nope, there were dragons there.
Don't go there.
I'm going to be doing that a lot this quarter.
And so as a result, if you are really loving syntax, you should consider 101 syntax to be a teaser for 121.
Because there you'll get a bigger picture.
You'll be working with actual syntacticians who will give you a much better sense of how all of this can work in real life if you're trying to build a complete theory of English.
And even still, a complete theory of English is very, very difficult.
But you'll get a much bigger sense of it there.
And you'll use a different set of rules there, by the way.
But that's okay.
So the phrase structure rules I'm giving you are very, very simple, right?
A phrase structure rule is a thing that describes the sub elements which can form a constituent.
Basically, I'm saying that X, for instance, a noun phrase, is made up of two other things or one other thing.
A phrase structure rule just says these are the components that go within this kind of phrase, as well as giving us their ordering.
That's really important.
When I give you a list of rules, the ordering that I give these to you in is not, that's not changeable, right?
If I say this becomes an N and then a PP, then it needs to be exactly that.
And so we're going to be talking in terms of building trees, but really what we're doing is we're building sentences.
In our minds, presumably, if this kind of a framework has cognitive reality, in our minds we are doing, we're building sentences.
But in order to do that, we're using this hierarchy, right?
And so syntax trees are built using these phrase structure rules.
And so the format that I'm giving you is X goes to Y and Z.
And so this is not necessarily transformative.
This is a branching.
If I have X up here, that means that below that there needs to be a Y and a Z in that order.
That's exactly what we see there.
So if I give you a rule that says this, S goes to NPVP.
What that means is there's going to be an S node up at the top here, and then down here NP, down here VP.
Easy, right?
There are two things that go under an S node.
One of them is NP, one of them is VP, and they occur in that order.
So this is the way that you would look at these rules.
The arrow simply means this.
It means this thing turns into these two things here.
And so this is how a phrase structure rule looks on paper, and this is how it looks in a tree.
S becomes an NP and a VP in that order.
Okay.
So phrase structure rules are then building blocks of sentences.
We build sentences by building chunks using phrase structure rules,
and then we combine them into larger forms and larger forms and larger forms.
In a lot of ways, these look like many of you might have played with these as a kid or, frankly, as an adult.
I learned the name of these as tangrams, right?
But these are a set of many shapes that you can combine in different ways to create many more shapes, right?
You can turn these things into a sailboat or a goose or a camel or something like that.
You're just putting things together in such a way that you've created a different shape, even though it's the same elements.
So in a lot of ways, phrase structure rules work like that, right?
We can have an infinite number of sentences.
We've talked about this already.
But those infinite number of sentences are built up of a finite number of rules.
And so just by combining them differently, we get different sentence shapes.
Then a quick note on notation.
We're going to talk about three levels for nouns.
We're going to talk about NP, which is a noun phrase.
We're going to talk about N bar, which is this guy right over here, where you get that little bar there.
That's N bar.
And so that is an intermediate level.
And then N is just the noun itself.
So NP is the noun phrase itself.
N bar, which is sometimes written like this, by the way.
You might see this out in the literature.
That's fine, too.
But we're going to call it N bar.
And that is an intermediate level.
And then there is the N.
And then I'm also going to be using these two things interchangeably, a real arrow and a fake arrow here.
The real arrow and the fake arrow.
This is just way easier to type, right?
So you might be thinking at this point, wow, syntactic phrase structure rules?
But really, syntactic phrase structure rules!
No? Okay.
All right.
Anyways, how do we build these trees is the bigger question you're probably getting at.
You've looked at the homework.
You're like, oh, my God, we're going to have to build sentence trees.
How do we do that?
What do these phrase structure rules do to help us?
How does any of this work?
And so the way that you'll do this is first you'll go through a sentence.
You'll look at a sentence and you will find the constituents in there.
You'll use our constituency test to figure out, okay, what chunks go together here?
And then for each of those chunks, you'll think, okay, what is this?
Is this a noun phrase?
Is this a verb phrase?
A prepositional phrase?
Maybe this is a sentence.
Maybe it's a complementizer.
But you'll think about what kinds of phrases you're looking at.
So you might look down at a chunk and go, hmm, let's see here.
From La Jolla.
That's a preposition.
There's a from there.
This is probably a prepositional phrase.
There's got to be a PP around here someplace, right?
And then there are different ways that you can do this.
But one way is to start from the top.
Start from sentences and then move down the tree,
stitching together all of those various phrase structures that you're ‑‑
I'm sorry, well, stitching together all those constituents
according to our phrase structure rules,
using this to create these individual little phrase structure chunks.
Some folks prefer to work up starting from individual phrases.
You know what?
That works fine, too.
It's all good.
But the top node, the very thing at the top of the tree for our class
is always going to be S.
This is not the case in all theories of syntax.
Other theories of syntax might use different approaches.
But for us, at least, the top node is always going to be an S.
And so you want to make sure that every single branching,
every time that your tree splits, make sure it's obeying one of our rules.
Every split needs to be justified by something on this sheet of paper here.
Right?
So you'll need to think, okay, this is rule 9 here,
and then that splits down to a rule 1 and then a rule 2, et cetera.
And then after you've done this, you have a beautiful, beautiful tree.
A couple of other rules for this.
You always want to branch downwards.
In this class, we're just branching downwards.
This is a convention, but it's a good convention.
It makes things easier.
You never want to move upwards.
You never want to have, like, a branch that goes down
and then another one that goes back up off of it and then off to the new.
Just always go downwards.
Lines should never, ever, ever cross.
You don't want this to be the case.
It doesn't make sense for it to because this is strictly hierarchical.
They don't need to.
And if you think they need to, you're probably doing it wrong.
Come talk to us in office hours.
And then you will not have any 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 10-way branching in Ling 101.
Every branch will either have one connection down,
so every little node, every NP, for instance,
will either go down to one connection below it or to two.
But we won't do any 3-way branching.
There are arguments of syntax that allow 3-way,
or theories of syntax, that is, that allow 3-way branching.
And some of them are quite compelling,
but for this class, we're keeping things simple.
You will either have one going down or you'll have two going down,
but you'll never have three.
And then finally, some branches might end up having two words.
So, for instance, Will Styler probably doesn't have any syntactic internal structure to it.
But on your homeworks, I'm going to give you one-word chunks.
So Mai Tai would be another example of, like, it's technically two words.
It's got a space in the middle, but it's not like Mai is a type of Thai,
or something like that, or back up your computer.
Yeah, one could pretty much argue that that's a single chunk, right?
And then, again, use the phrase structure rules we give you on the handout.
Don't use other people's rules, because we will mark it wrong.
In some cases, you know, we might understand it,
but it's still going to be wrong because you're meant to use these rules.
This is for your protection as well as for ours, frankly.
So let's talk about these rules one by one.
We'll start off thinking about noun phrase rules,
because noun phrases are very intuitive for a lot of folks, right?
So a noun phrase, the first rule that you'd want to deal with
is that a noun phrase generally has a determiner and an end bar.
And then the end bar goes, and we'll talk more about why we have end bar in a second here.
But the end bar then becomes a noun, right?
So we go from noun phrase to determiner, like the,
and then an end bar, and then the end bar goes straight down to a noun.
So this gives us something like the cat.
The is a determiner.
We don't use a determiner phrase here.
We just have the noun phrase here, and then end bar goes to end, goes to cat.
It's important to write this intermediate level.
You'll see why in a little bit here.
But using these two rules, we can describe the phrase the cat, right?
Very simple noun phrase, but we'll use these two rules to do it.
You might be thinking to yourself, well, but there aren't always determiners, right?
There could be something like, you know, cats see dogs.
Right there, those are two noun phrases, cats and dogs, but without a determiner.
In this case, we have a different rule.
We have a rule that says NP just goes to end bar, and then end bar goes to end.
This is the rule that we've just seen already.
We've already played with rule three, but if you combine rules two and three,
you can deal with something like Will Styler or penguins, where there is no determiner.
So by using rules two and three together, you can get this little chain here.
Rule two at the top, then rule three right here.
And that gives us the right structure for this little chunk here.
Good? Happy?
Okay.
Adjectives.
So for adjectives, we need to throw in an additional rule here.
And that rule is that end bar goes to an adjective and then another end bar.
This is cool.
The fact that end bar can contain another end bar is recursion.
This allows us to keep adding things in there.
So we can combine rules one, rule four on the end there, and rule three to get something a little fancier.
This is supposed to be the cute cat, but for some reason it's cut off at the moment.
But there's a cat down there, I swear to you, and he's cute.
So in this case, NP goes to end bar, the cute cat.
Or here's a different one, some angry koalas.
In this case, we see the determiner here.
Then we go to an end bar.
But rather than just going straight to koalas, so end bar to end, we go end bar goes to an adjective and an end.
And so we put in the angry and then koalas.
So this is three different rules.
Rule one gives us this top split here.
Rule four gives us this intermediate split.
And then rule three gives us this split over here.
Nice.
Easy.
So this is how we would create that sentence structure.
But like I said, rule four is recursive.
Rule four can repeat and repeat and repeat and repeat and repeat and repeat over and over again.
Because the end bar contains yet another end bar.
And this can apply as many times as you need.
Again, recursion.
Or here's another great picture of recursion with Noam Chomsky holding a picture of recursion recurringing.
It's kind of amazing, right?
So nonetheless, we can have the cute cat, right?
This is a perfectly reasonable sentence.
But we could add another adjective in there.
And to add another adjective, all we would do is use recursion.
We would put underneath the end bar another adjective to end bar.
And so we now have two adjectives.
The cute black cat.
And then we could do it again.
Under this end bar over here, we could put another end bar.
Or we could do it at the top.
I forgot which way I did it in this one.
But we did.
Now we've got the tiny cute black cat.
So the end bar can insert here again.
And we can keep going.
The little tiny cute black cat.
And we can keep going.
The little tiny cute black stray cat.
We just keep creating new end bars here.
And we can keep adding new adjectives in there.
So you might be thinking, okay, this is great.
But why end bar?
Why do we use end bar rather than just NP there?
This is pretty straightforward, actually.
What we use, the reason we have end bar is because of this determiner here, right?
That determiner has to be in a certain position.
It is ungrammatical to say little the tiny cute black stray cat.
That doesn't work.
Or little tiny the cute black stray cat.
No.
Little tiny cute the black stray cat doesn't work.
Little tiny cute black the stray cat doesn't work.
And little tiny cute black stray the cat doesn't work.
The only structure that works is one where the determiner is outside all of these adjectives.
So we know that the determiner has to be at a level outside of the adjectives.
And if all of these were NPs, then we could put an NP with a determiner at any point in this.
And that would be predicted to be grammatical.
That would predict something that is not okay.
That would go against our fundamental rule of generate all the good stuff and don't generate crazy things.
And so we use NP here to say the NP level can take a determiner.
But the N bar level, oh, it can do adjectives.
It can do a bunch of stuff with an N bar.
But you sure can't add a determiner in there.
And so by having this structure, by having NP, then N bar, then N, we are able to capture this intuition.
Determiners go outside the adjectives.
But you can have as many adjectives as you'd like in the middle there.
So this is why we have N bar.
It allows us to do this.
And so it seems at some level like why are you overcomplicating things if you're just looking at, for instance, the cat.
Where you see NP, then N bar, N.
But in practice, for something like this, it pays off.
It describes the data better.
And if something describes the data better, as linguists, that's a win, right?
We want that thing.
So you can do that.
And you can keep going and going and going and going forever.
But that's the power of recursion.
And that's the power of N bar.
And that's the reason we have N bar in there.
Prepositions, what about them?
Linguists love prepositions.
So for prepositions, we have two rules that give us prepositiony things.
Well, actually, we've got some other rules involving prepositions.
But for the moment, we'll focus on this one.
First one is NP goes to NP and PP.
So a noun phrase contains a noun phrase.
Whoa, recursion!
As well as another prepositional phrase.
And then a prepositional phrase contains a preposition and a noun phrase.
Neat.
Let's see how these work in practice.
The dog from the future.
Okay.
So in this case, what we have here is a noun phrase that contains a noun phrase.
The dog.
Because this is a complete noun phrase here.
It is a complete constituent described by, I think this is rule 1 and 3?
Yes.
Yeah, rule 1 and 3.
So rule 1 and 3 gives us this chunk over here.
And then we use rule 5 up here.
Yes, that's rule 5.
And then rule 6 over here.
So now we have the dog with a prepositional phrase modifying it.
With a prepositional phrase attached to it.
Then within the prepositional phrase, we have a preposition.
Whoa, what a shock!
And then a noun phrase next to it.
So the preposition and then the thing it's describing the relationship with.
In this case, the future.
So by doing this, we have one complete chunk.
The dog from the future.
If I have the sentence, I saw the dog from the future, I could say, I saw him.
And that works, right?
I saw him replaces this entire chunk, so we know it is one entire chunk.
We know it's all one big NP.
So by doing this, we can do that.
So this gives us the power to start doing more complicated things.
I can say something like, two computational linguists from San Diego.
You have the rules to diagram this.
So what I encourage you to do right now, your life will be much better if you pause the video and try and diagram this chunk out.
You don't have to start from S here.
In fact, the whole thing is a noun phrase.
But I want you to go ahead and try and diagram this out while I drink some tea.
Pause the video.
Good?
Okay.
Cool.
The way that we would do this is as follows.
Two computational linguists is itself an NP.
It is a chunk.
I could say, those from San Diego.
That works.
Or who from San Diego?
I can replace this.
This is a chunk.
And from San Diego is similarly a chunk, right?
Two computational linguists.
I could say which two computational linguists or something like that.
Or from San Diego, two computational linguists came.
Something like that.
Either way, you can replace both of these chunks.
So these are all chunks.
And they all go under an NP.
The first NP has a determiner.
In this case, two.
Two can be a determiner, by the way.
We talked about determiners as being a or the, but this can be a two.
This can be a determiner as well.
Right?
You also have an adjective here.
So you need an N bar.
And then linguists.
That's fine.
And then from San Diego has a PP.
From and then San Diego.
Why is San Diego a single chunk?
Well, San Diego isn't really two things, I would argue.
It's not, for instance, there's San Diego and Maldiego.
It's not like there are two separate cities here.
I'd say San Diego is a single unified chunk.
There aren't different Diegos we have to worry about here.
So now we can make a sentence.
Pardon me.
Now let's think about how we would make that sentence.
So rule seven gives us the fundamental.
This is the thing that starts off at the top of every tree.
So a sentence goes to an NP and a VP.
Period.
Every sentence in the English language has a noun phrase and a verb phrase.
You can create incomplete sentences.
Like, for instance, walk.
And in that case, that's kind of complete.
It's a command.
They're weird, right?
But every sentence by and large will have an S, an NP, and a VP.
And then for a verb phrase, a verb phrase can be very simple.
It can just be a verb, right?
So I can say I see.
Cool.
I see.
I'm seeing right now.
Amazing.
I talk.
I rant.
All of those things are a thing.
So a very, very simple sentence could use rules two, three, seven, and eight.
So we would use rule seven gives us S to NP, VP.
Rules two and three give us NP, N bar, N, will.
And then rule eight gives us VP to V, eight.
So we have will eight.
This is a complete sentence, and this is a complete tree.
Very simple tree, but a good one.
But we might want to add more complexity in there.
For instance, a VP becomes a verb and a prepositional phrase.
So it's not just the case that will eight.
If I wanted to say will eight behind the theater, I could do that.
I could say will eight outside APNM.
Great.
That works.
And so now this part here is the same, right?
We still have a rule two to three for this chunk.
And then eight outside APNM, we know that's one chunk because I could say
will did so, right?
And that would replace the whole thing.
So then VP goes to PP underneath there because there's the outside,
the APNM thing.
And then there's the verb here.
And then within the prepositional phrase, there's a separate
downphrase, APNM.
And, again, we'll just consider that to be a single chunk because it's
not really decomposable, right?
It would be weird.
Even if you said applied physics and mathematics, it's not really
syntactic-y.
It's just a label for something, right?
So anyways, this is how you could diagram that slightly more
complicated sentence.
But a lot of verbs are what are called transitive verbs.
And they take a noun phrase as the object of that.
So this allows us to do something a little more complicated.
So we have a verb phrase that includes both a verb and another noun
phrase.
So I could do something like will ate the cake.
So in this case, this part's easy.
We've done this over and over again.
And if it doesn't feel easy, scroll back again or watch back a little bit,
and we'll talk you back through that again.
But still, will ate the cake.
In this case, we have the verb phrase.
We have a verb still.
But then beneath it, the thing that the verb is modifying is the noun
phrase, the thing that is being eaten in this case.
And that is the cake.
And this noun phrase looks like every other noun phrase we've ever seen.
What's underneath a noun phrase tag is uniform, right?
You will always use the same rules for noun phrase, no matter what's
above it, right?
A noun phrase is a noun phrase.
But you'll need to make sure you follow the rules, even in that case.
And then we can bring back old rules, right?
We can do an NP, boring NP, goes to an NPVP.
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.
VP goes to VNP.
That's what I meant to say here.
And then we can have a determiner in there.
And then we can throw in a couple of NPARs for adjectives.
So we can have will ate the massive chocolate cake.
This thing is a fundamentally boring noun phrase that we've done before.
This is no different than the cute black kitten.
But we've just added that complexity back in.
We've brought those other rules in.
And then we can bring in more rules.
We can throw in a prepositional phrase.
I could say will ate the massive chocolate cake.
Again, this is a chunk we can handle here.
From the new bakery, this is a chunk we already know how to handle.
We can combine them using this rule here, which is rule five.
And then we can combine those using the verb phrase here.
And then we end up with will ate the massive chocolate cake from the new bakery.
Cool.
And maybe we want to modify the verbing.
This is a slightly different case.
In this case, we have a preposition phrase here that's modifying the cake.
It is the massive chocolate cake from the new bakery.
But we might want to do something that modifies how the verbing happened.
So, for instance, will ate with his wife.
This means that I didn't eat a thing that was, you know, this is a preposition phrase.
What I did is I did the act of eating in concert with my wife.
My wife and I were sitting together and we ate.
Right?
So, this allows me to modify that verb with a preposition phrase.
So, we have a verb phrase that goes to a VP and a PP.
And, by the way, recursion.
Whoa, cool.
So, you can add in any other element of a VP underneath this one.
In this case, it's very simple.
VP to V.
But will ate with his wife.
Very easy, right?
Or I can say two computational linguists from San Diego walked into a bar.
Nice.
Okay.
So, how do we finish this?
We already know this chunk.
We've done this chunk before.
And, in fact, it looks identical to what we see over here.
But then the question becomes how do we handle the rest of it?
How do we handle the walked into a bar?
So, what we'll do is we'll start off and we'll use this S goes to NPVP rule.
That's rule seven.
Then we'll use over here, we will use the VP.
So, we'll use rule looks like nine.
So, rule nine gives us V to PP.
Right?
Underneath the verb phrase.
And then PP goes to PNP.
Easy.
And then for NP, we'll do the usual determiner, end bar, et cetera.
So, by doing this, we're able to talk about how they walked.
Basically, they walked into a bar.
We modify that verb phrase using a prepositional phrase.
So, cool.
Hopefully, this is starting to make some sense.
And you're starting to see that from these very basic building blocks, we can do a bunch of other things.
And we can do this same thing, by the way, of adding in a preposition to a sentence we've already created.
Will ate the massive chocolate cake from the new bakery with his wife.
So, I can add in this VPPP thing, just stick it in the middle there.
Right?
Add in another intermediate layer and then attach that with his wife.
And it's worth noting the positioning of with his wife here.
With his wife is modifying this entire chunk.
Ate the massive chocolate cake from the new bakery.
It's not a new bakery with my wife.
That would be really weird, right?
It's not a massive chocolate cake with my wife.
The thing that included my wife in the process was eating the massive chocolate cake from the new bakery.
That whole thing includes her.
So, we'll do it in this way.
We'll use this VP goes to VPPP rule, which is rule 11, to do that.
And so, hopefully, this is starting to feel familiar.
These are Legos.
We're just building sentences up from smaller existing parts.
And so, we can keep doing this to combine small elements and get bigger and bigger and fancier and fancier trees.
I saw the big sweet dogs from La Jolla with fleas.
This whole thing over here is a noun phrase.
Right?
And all of these rules are ones we've seen.
Noun phrase goes to NPPP.
Great.
Here's another one.
Noun phrase goes to NPPP.
Great.
This is a boring noun phrase with some end bars.
Actually, it's not boring.
It's amazing.
But, nonetheless.
And then, this prepositional phrase, straightforward.
This prepositional phrase, straightforward.
All we're doing is combining existing chunks that we know about, that we've used, that we're happy with, to make bigger, fancier chunks.
And we can go deeper, though.
We can absolutely go deeper.
So, complementizers are really fun, and they put sentences inside sentences.
These are words like that, when, if, while, as, and there are other ones out there in the world.
But what they allow us to do is to embed a sentence within a sentence.
So, we have now Rule 7, which gives us a sentence goes to an NPVP.
We now have a new rule that says a verb phrase gives us a verb and a complementizer.
And then we have Rule 13, which says a complementizer gives us a complement, or a CP, that is, has a complementizer, and then a whole damn sentence.
And then the whole process can repeat.
You can drop a whole new sentence in there.
Oh, my God.
And so, you can have a sentence like this.
I love when you hug squirrels.
This is a very straightforward complementizer sentence.
So, I could have just replaced all of this with a single NP, right?
I could cover all this up and say, I love you, all in a platonic teacher-student sort of way.
But nonetheless, I love you is a perfectly reasonable sentence in the English language.
But I can replace that NP with a CP here.
And then I can change this whole thing into a sentence.
So, I love when, complementizer, and then this whole bit down here, if we put all that aside, you hug squirrels, perfectly acceptable sentence, right?
Little weird, perfectly acceptable.
So, right there, that's a sentence just like any of the ones we've seen before.
Easy.
All we're doing is we're using this little intermediate layer here, this CP and this C, to merge those sentences, to stick one sentence inside the other one.
So, I love when you hug squirrels allows us to put a sentence inside a sentence.
And we can go deeper.
We could say, John knows that, so here, very basic sentence, I love when you hug squirrels.
That's the sentence from last time.
But we've just stuck it inside another sentence using a complementizer.
And this combines with everything that we were doing.
People cheered as Will ate the massive chocolate cake from the new bakery with his wife.
This looks big and scary, but in practice, all of these are small chunks that you've dealt with already.
And then you just keep stitching them together with the rules that you already have.
So, you have a sentence here.
And then you want to insert that, so you need a complementizer.
Oh, here we go.
That goes to a CP.
Oh, then we can put a verb here, another noun phrase, etc.
And we can keep going.
The proud baker from San Bernardino loved that people cheered as Will ate the massive chocolate cake from the new bakery with his wife.
This is a perfectly grammatical English sentence.
A bit unwieldy, I'll give you.
But this is how you create that.
All of these things are chunks we've seen before.
This sentence we've already analyzed.
This is the last sentence we were looking at.
Then I threw another complementizer in there to give us a verb phrase.
And then I just decided, oh, let's make a bigger NP here.
So, it's a proud baker from San Bernardino.
And you can keep going and going and going and going and going until you feel like you need help.
And that's okay.
But the fact is, these relatively simple 13 rules, and it may not feel simple at the time,
but relative to the full story, so to speak, this is pretty straightforward,
are able to give you massive amounts of complexity.
The little bits of grammar that we have in language, or the large amounts of grammar, if you want to look at it that way,
that we have allow us to build huge amounts of complexity.
And that's amazing.
That's a joy.
And that's one of the things that provides us linguists with job security, right?
If there are an infinite number of sentences we can produce, it's using things like this, like recursion.
It's using things like the flexibility of these building blocks, which allow us to, under this NP,
look, we could just keep going.
We could put more prepositional phrases.
From San Bernardino, which recently had, you know, et cetera.
And so, we can do a great deal with these very basic building blocks.
So, you might be feeling, oh, my God, I need help.
This is scary.
I'm afraid.
Help me.
And that's okay.
That last one was mostly me just having fun.
Fun for certain values of fun.
I found it fun.
And I'm sure someday you will, too, when you're a linguist.
But more importantly, you're not going to have anything quite that complicated on tests or homeworks or things like that.
You will be doing things that are a little bit simpler than that.
So, all of these things, though, this is the process, right?
You just take it and you break a large sentence apart into smaller chunks,
and then you stitch those chunks together, stitch those chunks together, stitch those,
until you reach the end and you hit an S and you're like, okay, I'm done here.
This is probably feeling a little bit intimidating right now.
And that's okay.
A lot of people feel a little intimidated as they're first getting started with these kinds of trees.
But it gets easier.
And we are here to help you.
That's the most important thing to remember, is that we're talking about this right now,
but we're going to spend a bunch of time on this.
We will spend a bunch of time on this in class.
And if you come to our office hours, we will spend even more time on it.
We want you to be able to look at this sentence and be like, yeah, easy peasy.
And you can get there.
I believe in you.
It's a thing, right?
But it's going to take a little bit of time, and you'll get there.
So, how do you do this?
How do you actually, like, draw them?
What is the physical process to make this beast here?
How do you do that?
There are a couple of ways that you can do this.
I mean, one of them is to do it by hand.
And if you do that, make sure it's legible.
On a homework, for instance, you'll have the opportunity to scan something,
and so you can go through and do that.
I encourage you to, you know, start in pencil and then trace over in pen to make it darker.
Make sure that you're not, you know, because it's really easy to run out of space.
Like, oh, okay, I'll just start right here, and then suddenly, oh, God, this is getting bigger and bigger.
And then you start kind of trying to cheat down the side of the paper, and it's not good.
So, make sure that you're doing it legibly.
And if you end up doing that, just copy it onto a new sheet of paper.
It's okay.
But you need to scan your paper, not just take a picture of it.
And it's also really important that it is legible.
Because if we can't read it, if we can't understand it, we can't grade it, right?
There are other approaches that you can do.
I've had people, I use LaTeX, actually, to generate all of my sentence trees these days,
which is a fancy typesetting engine.
But people also will use PowerPoint.
They'll also use MS Paint is a possibility.
There are also tools like this.
This is a tool that allows you to enter in a syntax tree in a very specific format,
and it will create a pretty one for you.
So, you need to use what's called bracket notation to do that.
I already do that for LaTeX.
But bracket notation works.
It's a little frustrating, but it gets you there.
And your brain needs to work on that.
But this is the notation, actually, to create something like that in bracket notation.
So, each one of these brackets close chunks of this.
You're probably looking at this and thinking, oh, God, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
It gets easier.
There are ways that you can get your brain around it.
But actually doing it, it's much more straightforward.
But that's an approach that you can take as well.
And some people love doing it this way.
Some people would rather do it in PowerPoint or MS Paint.
And some people who have, you know, they've been in architecture school already,
have the handwriting, have the legibility, and are able to do it by hand.
That works too.
But either way, there are lots of approaches here.
So, what I'd like you to do for the moment is actually to practice for a second.
I'm going to go on ahead, and I'm going to have you pause.
What I want you to do is we're going to break down the sentence here.
And I want you to go ahead, and we'll do it step by step.
So, the grumpy polar bears from L.A. hated the excruciating traffic on the 405.
It's a big sentence.
Let's start with the grumpy polar bears.
Pause.
Well, actually, diagram.
Then pause.
Or pause, then diagram.
Okay.
So, now that you've finished this sentence, let's look at what it looks like.
The way that we would do this is starting off with a rule one.
That gives us an NP goes to a dead end bar.
Then we go to a rule four right here, which gives us this adjective.
And then rule four gives us another adjective.
And then rule three.
Some of you might be asking, wait, isn't polar bears one word?
You could make that argument, right?
I don't know.
But you could probably sell me that polar bears is a single chunk.
I don't know.
This isn't a super important element of the structure.
But I went ahead, and I told you, you know, I'm sorry.
In homeworks and such, I will go ahead and tell you, treat polar as an adjective.
If there was a situation like this.
So, from L.A.
I just gave you that chunk, because it's a single chunk.
So, from L.A.
I just gave you that chunk, because it's a single chunk.
So, from L.A.
I just gave you that chunk, because it's a single chunk.
I just gave you that chunk, because it's very easy.
It's rule six, rule two, rule three.
Now, next chunk.
The grumpy polar bears from L.A.
Go.
Okay.
I'm assuming that you've paused the video, and now completed it.
So, let's go ahead and have you try this.
What you've got already is most of what you need here.
You just need to combine the prepositional phrase, and then that noun phrase.
And you use rule five to do that.
So, you end up with this chunk here.
So, the grumpy polar bears from L.A.
is accounted for.
Okay.
Let's try the excruciating traffic.
Pause the video.
Go.
Okay.
So, excruciating traffic uses rules one, four, and three.
So, NP goes to dead N bar, N bar goes to edge N bar, N bar goes to N.
Easy.
At this point in time, this is something that you've seen a fair amount.
So, great.
On the 405, this one should have built in, but here you go.
Have a freebie.
On the 405, gives you this.
Each individual element is according to our rules here.
So, we've got a rule six, followed by a rule one, followed by a rule three.
Now, combine these two together.
Go.
Okay.
So, you'll use a rule five here to combine these chunks again.
So, NP goes to NPPP, and there you go.
Now, hated the excruciating traffic on the 405.
What rule goes above these?
Take a second.
So, this whole chunk is a constituent, and the thing that heads it is a verb.
So, that would be a verb phrase, right?
And so, we know that we have a verb phrase here.
And we know that there is a verb here, and we know that this chunk,
we've already finished the excruciating traffic bit, that's a noun phrase.
So, we need a rule that goes VP, goes to verb, noun phrase.
And that rule is rule nine.
And boom, there you go.
Now, you have mambo number five stuck in your head.
All right.
And then, finally, we can tie it all together.
The grumpy polar bears are going to go to NPPP.
And then, finally, we can tie it all together.
The grumpy polar bears from LA hated the excruciating traffic on the 405.
Go!
Okay.
So, the way that you do this is actually really easy, right?
All you really need here is rule seven.
Then, boom.
You combine this NP that we built already with this VP that we just finished building
with rule seven, and you're all set.
This is the correct structure.
This is not a small sentence.
This is not a trivial sentence.
But by breaking it down little bit by little bit, you're able to do this.
You're able to make this work.
If you would like some immediate practice with this before we get to class,
and we will practice it a bunch more in our class sessions.
You'll practice it more for discussions.
You will get more practice with this.
But this is another presentation that just has more examples where I ask you,
and you can just click through one by one,
and I will give you a bunch more of these things that you can try
where you will get, you know, okay, here's what to do.
Okay, now here's the form.
Here's what to do.
Here's the form.
So, if you're feeling at all questionable about this, just go ahead,
click this link.
It's going to be awesome, or just type it in,
and you will be able to find immediately all of those examples
and work through them on your own.
And if you're having trouble with them, come to class, see if that helps,
or just come into our office hours,
and we will more than happily walk you through this step by step.
So, there we go.
For next time, we're going to touch on some of the things
we're leaving behind in syntax.
In practice, for the exams, for the homeworks,
you know everything you need to know now.
By using this set of phrase structure rules that I've given you
and using the basic principles for building trees,
you know what you need to.
The next step is going to be looking at the things
that you aren't necessarily going to know how to do in English
and just kind of focusing on some of the fun syntactic questions
that we have to leave on the table because Ling 101 is so short.
So, for next time, we'll focus on that.
Thank you all very much, and have a wonderful day.
