Okay. Hi, everybody. Before we get started, a quick public service announcement.
It's getting to be later in the quarter now. That means everybody is getting busier.
Not just you guys. We are, too, on the instructional team.
And as a result, maybe our response times may end up going down a little bit.
And so this is just a really good practice always to at least look over the homeworks before they are due.
Look over them earlier in the week. Look over them before the class session, before the help session.
That way we can all be on the same page, right? You can ask your questions early.
Because I know there's the temptation to put it off until the last minute.
And then we get these emails, and then the puppy is sad.
And you don't want the puppy to be sad, do you? I know I sure don't.
All right. Moving on. Let's think about semantics. Let's think about meaning here.
So far in the quarter, we've been focused on structure at all different levels.
We've been thinking about sound structure. Then we've been thinking about sound patterns.
How sounds are put together. Then we turn them into morphemes and then to words.
And then we've thought about word patternings, right? And syntax has its own structure.
Now it's time to think about what it all actually means.
So far we've been kind of treating meaning as self-evident.
Like, oh yeah, we look at this sentence and we know what it means. But how do we know that?
So that's what we're going to get into now, which is semantics, the study of meaning in language.
This is different from, and there are two different fields.
We're going to talk about semantics and pragmatics.
And we're actually going to blend the two a little bit.
But pragmatics is a different thing. This is the study of meaning in a conversational context.
So semantics is the study of the inherent meaning of language.
What does it mean to say, I am a linguist?
What is that asserting about this thing that is I?
What is that asserting about linguisticness, if anything?
Semantics gets into the study of meaning versus pragmatics is meaning in context.
It's meaning in the world.
If I were to say, if somebody walks up to me and says,
Hey, I've got this rash. Could you take a look at it?
And I say, I'm a linguist. What does that mean?
That means I'm not a good person to look at this rash.
Why are you asking me this?
Go find a real doctor.
So, you know, meaning is different in absolute form versus in context.
And so those are the difference.
We're going to spend time with both of these guys.
Today, we're going to focus on meaning in sort of a greater sense.
What do words actually mean?
And next time we'll go deeper into word meanings as well as a little bit more of pragmatic stuff.
So today's plan is to talk about truth in sentences,
to talk about ambiguity, to talk about entailment versus implicature,
and then connotation, denotation.
And then finally, we'll talk a little bit about prototypes,
which are one way that we can think about meaning in the real world.
So, OK, to start with truth in sentences, what does truth mean?
I mean, it's something we all ask, but in practice,
sentences at the sentence level can be true or false with reference to the actual state of the world.
Since words each have meanings, right?
And those meanings can be defined logically,
we can actually evaluate the logical truth of a sentence.
In some cases, this is super easy, right?
A tautology.
For instance, saying all linguists are linguists.
Is that true?
Yeah, that is super true.
Because you're saying that all people who have this attribute,
that is, they are linguists, have that attribute,
that is, that they are linguists.
This is true inherently.
This is true in every possible universe.
Unless you want to get into weird games about,
oh, well, this is one sense of linguist and this is another,
this is strictly true.
A tautology is true.
Every bachelor is unmarried.
This is also a tautology, because every bachelor,
a bachelor is a way to say an unmarried man,
and saying that an inherent part,
every unmarried man is unmarried, is a tautology.
A circle is circular.
Circular is, of course, the state of being like a circle.
So if you are a circle, you are like a circle.
This is a dumb sentence, but it is true.
The long cat is long.
You've said that the cat is long here,
and so the cat is still long.
Wow, tautologies.
And all tautologies are true.
They are inherently true.
There is no situation in which they are not true.
They are really boring in practice,
not necessarily from a semantic point of view,
but just as sentences.
They're really boring, but they're really true.
As opposed to contradictions, which are sort of the opposite.
A circle is triangular.
No, this can't be true.
Unless you start playing with the meanings of the words
and saying, oh, well, in this case,
triangular means shaped a lot like a circle.
This is inherently false.
French people are not French.
This is false.
This is contradictory.
It doesn't work.
Will is tall and short.
No.
I can either be relatively tall,
or I can be relatively short.
But I can't be both of those things at the same time.
But all contradictions are false.
They are inherently false.
There is no way to make these things true
unless you start changing definitions of words.
And then there are sentences that are meaningless.
For instance, this one.
This is the stereotypical meaningless sentence.
This is the one everybody always trots out.
Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.
What does this even mean?
It's hard to say,
because there are weird things in this.
You can't be both colorless and green.
That doesn't make sense.
It's not that it's true or it's false.
It just doesn't work.
Colorlessness and greenness are,
no, they can't be the same thing.
And ideas can't have colors to them anyways,
and they can't be green either.
And ideas, for that matter, don't sleep, right?
They're not biological creatures requiring sleep.
And if they do sleep, they don't sleep furiously.
No one sleeps furiously.
Well, okay, I've slept furiously.
But still, you don't sleep furiously, right?
That's not a thing.
And ideas sure as heck will not do so.
So nonetheless, hey, taboo avoidance.
So ideas cannot sleep furiously,
especially if they're colorless and green.
And overall, this sentence is gibberish.
It means nothing.
It is completely meaningless.
Then you get non-statement sentences.
You get commands.
This is not really a statement.
It can't be evaluated for true or false.
If I say, turn in your homework, is that true?
Maybe? No? Yes? I don't know.
All I'm asking you to do is to turn in your homework,
but it's not like there's an evaluation you can make there.
Similarly with a question.
If I ask you, hey, have you turned in your homework?
Is that true or false?
That's not even a question you can ask about a question, right?
Or a greetings.
Welcome to UC San Diego.
False.
You might argue that I am not welcome,
and that's false because you're welcome here.
No matter who you are, you're welcome here at UCSD.
But that said, this statement doesn't have a truth value.
I am literally expressing to you, welcome.
I'm just saying this aloud to you.
There's no truth to it, right?
And so these can't even be evaluated.
They're not making a claim about the real world.
They're making, they're trying to make an order.
They're doing this kind of a commandee speech act-y thing.
In this case, it's asking a question.
In this case, it's just giving you greetings,
but they're not false or true.
They can't be evaluated.
And then there are speech acts, performative languages,
or bits of language, that is.
Something like, I sentence you to three weeks of probation.
This is a different thing,
and we'll talk more about these, actually, a little bit later.
But here, the thing that you're saying is itself an action.
If a judge says this, you have then been sentenced, right?
I now pronounce you married.
Again, the act itself of saying this does work in the real world.
It changes you from being unmarried to married.
And we'll talk about these more in pragmatics,
but again, those can't be true or false,
because it's just a thing, right?
You could say, well, you can't pronounce me married,
because you're just a random person on the bus.
That's true. That's accurate.
But you wouldn't say that it is a false thing that they said there.
It's just like, I don't recognize your authority,
and I don't know this person, so why did you just marry me?
Oh, that's right, because you're crazy.
That works.
But anyways, so these things can't be evaluated.
But declarative sentences, like, for instance,
Will is a nerd, can be shown to be true, in that case,
or false, in the sense of, Will is really good at sports.
Yeah, that's false.
So, we can do this.
And so, we can double-check this.
If I give you a sentence like, Will waved,
then what I'm saying here is that there is a set of people who waved, right?
If Will is in that set, then the sentence is true.
If I'm sitting here, waving at you,
then that's accurate.
There is a set of people who waved, but if I am not,
if I'm standing here, like, glaring at you,
and in reality, someone else is waving,
then it is not true that Will waved.
You can evaluate this.
And this gives rise to the whole idea of compositional semantics.
This is the idea that syntactic structure,
like we've already been talking about,
coupled with understanding of the meaning of individual phrases,
allows the determination of meaning.
And determination of meaning, as well as, in many cases,
truth or falsehood, via rules.
There are rules that you can apply to the syntax,
coupled with understanding of the words,
that can give you the truth of the sentence.
This is really cool stuff.
We do a great deal in 130 and then 230.
But it is fundamentally not the same thing
as what a lot of people mean by semantics.
And mostly, I mean in the public sphere.
Semantics, to most people, just means a meaning.
But compositional semantics goes much deeper.
It's looking at this meaning via determination,
via these rules, via the structure,
and via the meaning of the words themselves.
So, compositional semantics is awesome.
But this is more of a 130 and a 230 kind of thing.
So, this gives you the sense that there is a level of meaning
at which we can talk about things like truth and falseness.
And there is a level of meaning that is derived,
strictly speaking, from the words themselves
and from the structures of the sentences involved.
Therefore, if we can evaluate,
OK, this is the true meaning of X,
using compositional semantics,
there might be cases where it's hard to evaluate
what the meaning of something is.
And this is ambiguity.
I use this over and over again.
But ambiguity, what happens in vagueness, stays in vagueness.
Ambiguity is all about questioning.
Like when you can't quite figure out what,
which is a lot like what or which this thing means.
Wow, it's been a long day.
Anyways, ambiguity is where there's ambiguity,
as you might expect, about what this means.
It could go either way.
And we're going to talk about three kinds of ambiguity in this class.
Lexical ambiguity, we're going to talk about
syntactic or structural ambiguity,
and we'll talk about semantic ambiguity.
So lexical ambiguity,
many of you are probably already familiar with.
In fact, you're familiar with all of these things,
just maybe not by that name.
Lexical ambiguity is, I'm not sure what sense
of the word you're using.
Words have many different senses.
This is an important thing to kind of keep in mind.
The same sequence of phonemes,
or in some cases the same sequence of morphemes,
can actually have multiple meanings.
And so the sense of a word
is the particular meaning of that word
that's in use at that very moment.
So spam.
Spam is a word with multiple senses, right?
There is the food sense, which I believe is spiced ham.
And so spam occurs in little tins,
and you can buy it at a grocery store.
And then there is spam in the sense of junk email,
like it went into my spam folder.
And in fact, it would be very incongruous
if you had a spam folder and it was a folder in your office
with a bunch of spam in it, right?
That would be very strange.
So yeah, spam has two different senses.
Lit has two different senses.
One is, I lit a fire, or something like that,
in my fireplace.
The other is, wow, that party was lit.
Broke. Broke can mean two different things.
Broke can mean I smashed something.
It is now broke.
Or I broke my remote when I accidentally
yeeted it out the window.
Versus broke in the sense of,
I really can't afford to buy anything new right now.
I am completely broke.
Those are two different things.
Turn can have many, many meanings.
It can have a meaning of, to turn,
in the classical sense.
And it can have a meaning of,
like to turn somebody to the dark side.
Like that.
Or you can turn on somebody, right?
Somebody that you previously cooperated with,
suddenly, ha, ha, ha, ha,
I've been working for the other side all along.
You can turn on somebody.
Or a lemon can be a fruit.
Or you could have a really bad car,
for instance, where it's a defective product.
Both of those things are possible.
But there are different senses of each of these things.
And one of the questions you have to ask yourself
any time you hear a sentence is,
which sense of the word lit am I hearing?
Which sense of the word broke am I hearing?
Because this is really important for interpreting meaning.
So a lexical ambiguity is where you have
a sentence where you're not clear
what's being said on the basis of
which word sense is being heard.
So, for instance, he sold her a lemon.
This could mean one of two things.
This could mean this person
walked up to a person with a small citrus fruit
and said, here, would you like this lemon?
I'll give it to you for one dollar.
And the lady said, sure!
I'll take that lemon.
He sold her a lemon.
Or it could mean that he sold her a car
that was terrible, right?
They got off the lot and the wheels fell off.
It was a train wreck, right?
So this could mean one of two things.
We're not sure which one it is,
on the meaning of this word lemon here.
Stop sending me spam.
Could mean, hey, you keep
signing me up for Viagra ads.
Stop doing that.
Or it could mean you keep
using the postal service to mail me
cartons of spiced ham.
I'm a vegetarian. Stop.
This could be...
This is ambiguous.
Ambiguous. Nice.
The prosody was all wrong there. The prosody.
Anyways, so this is actually
ambiguous, although in practice
it's more likely to be the commercial email version.
But who knows, right?
Will cut up the center of the paper.
We talked about this already, actually. Remember the example of
you have a piece of paper. You can cut up the center
straight in a line, or you can cut up
the center just by cutting on the center for a little while.
That could be one or the other there.
Here's another good ambiguity.
I'm a huge metal fan. Me too.
Although, interestingly, prosody helps us.
I'm a huge metal fan for this guy.
And I'm a huge metal fan
for this guy. Interesting.
So, anyways,
this is an ambiguity. If you just see
this sentence, you don't know whether somebody is a
huge metal fan or a huge metal fan
just based on the writing
there. Or, here's another funny ambiguity.
Which you can look at while I drink.
One of my very favorite
cartoonists, Liz Clemo. Great stuff.
So, okay. Structural
ambiguity. So that's lexical ambiguity.
Lexical ambiguity is ambiguous on the
basis of, I don't know what
sense of that word you're using. And the
meaning of that could be very different
depending on the sense you're using.
So, structural and syntactic
ambiguity is that. The next question is
well, okay. I'm sorry.
Structural syntactic ambiguity is
something we've dealt with before, actually.
I don't know what syntactic structure
it is that you're going for there.
I understand all of the words in the sentence.
All the words are fine. I don't have any
issues in terms of what sense you mean.
But, I don't know
what structure you're wanting and
therefore I can't interpret the sentence.
So, a good, the classic example again is
I saw the man with the telescope.
In this case, this is I saw
or, I'm sorry, I saw the man
using the telescope.
With the telescope is modifying the verb.
So, here, I have a telescope.
I am looking out at the guy and
I see him. As opposed to
this structure, which is I saw
with my eyes, no,
unaided, a dude with a telescope
out there. There is a guy with a telescope
out there and I see him or I saw him.
So, these
two sentences are ambiguous. It could either
mean I saw a man using
a telescope that I was looking through
or I saw a man
who was looking through a telescope outside.
These two things, we don't know
the answer unless we know the syntactic
structure. So, these are structurally ambiguous.
The angry squirrel stole
the mixed nuts from Walmart. Again, we talked about
this one already. It could be that he stole
mixed nuts that were bought from Walmart
or it could be that he stole
mixed nuts from the Walmart store.
The stealing occurred at Walmart.
So, again, structurally ambiguous.
We don't know which of those two meanings
is true unless we know the syntactic
structure here. Here, they were
stolen from Walmart. Here, the
mixed nuts are from Walmart, but the theft could have
happened anywhere. Here's a really
good structural ambiguity that came up
actually not so long ago.
Delta has banned the Navy SEAL
who killed Osama bin Laden for refusing
to wear a mask.
Okay.
So,
Osama bin Laden was
not killed for refusing to wear a mask.
But
reading this, you could actually go either way.
Either Delta has banned
the Navy SEAL who killed Osama bin Laden
and they
banned him for refusing to wear a mask
or you would have Delta
Delta SEAL has banned the Navy SEAL
the Navy SEAL who killed
Osama bin Laden for refusing
to wear a mask. Either the killing
was for not wearing a mask
or the banning
was for not wearing a mask. But we don't know
which of those things is true without
knowing the greater syntactic structure here.
So, this is a great example of a structural
ambiguity that was sent to me by a colleague of like
oh, this needs to go in 101. It was like
oh, yes it does. So, this is a
very important ambiguity and it's not
actually ambiguous. We know
based on real world knowledge
that this, which one of these reads is true
but it is technically very
very ambiguous. And that's
a newspaper headline by the way. I mean
you would think somebody might have caught this but again
it's not ambiguous actually
because of context but in
reality it kind of is.
So, that is structural ambiguity.
The meaning of the sentence is unclear
to me because I don't know the structure
of the sentence and there are multiple
guesses here.
Then we get to semantic ambiguity.
This is I know the structure of the sentence.
I know all the senses
involved here. But there are just
multiple readings of this sentence here.
So, take this
for example. John kissed his
wife and so did Alex.
There are two meanings
to this sentence here. Think about it
for a second and come up with both meanings.
So, John kissed
his wife and so did Alex. Could
mean that John kissed his
wife named Linda.
So, John kissed Linda
and then Alex kissed his
wife who is named Maria.
So, Alex kissed
Maria and John kissed Linda.
There are four people involved here
and John kissed one of
them and Alex kissed another of them.
The other meaning here
is that John kissed his wife Linda
and then Alex kissed
John's wife Linda.
This may seem a little bit less probable
just based on how most people's relationship
is structured, but it is very possible
that that could be one
wife, John kissed his wife
and Alex also kissed
John's wife. These are ambiguous.
There are either two people kissing two wives
or one wife kissing two people.
If we rephrase this, we could say John
kissed Amy and so did Alex.
This is not ambiguous anymore.
In this case, Alex is kissing Amy
and John is kissing Amy.
This so did gives
us that verb phrase again. And similarly
if I could say John kissed his wife
and Alex kissed his own wife,
then again, it's not ambiguous
at all. But the way that this is phrased,
it's not a structural ambiguity. It's not a
sense ambiguity. We know what all the words
mean. We know how the sentence should be parsed.
We just don't know exactly what was
meant by this. There are two options here.
So this is a semantic ambiguity.
Here's another one.
Bob and Joe are married.
Again, we know all of the words here.
We have two names, two function words
and married, an adjective.
Bob and Joe are married. But
it is ambiguous what this means.
It could either mean that Bob and Joe are
married to each other.
Or it could mean that Bob and Joe
are married, but John and Mike
and Adam are single.
This means that Bob and Joe are both
people who are married.
But John, Mike and Adam are not.
So you're basically saying Bob and Joe
are two men who are both married.
Not to each other, but just generally speaking.
Or you could say
Bob and Joe are married. Bob is married to
Susan and Joe is married to Ashwini.
Either one of those things works.
But you have this ambiguity. Are they married
to each other? Or are they just people who are
married, but not to each other?
So this is very much an ambiguity.
But again, it's not structural. It's just
based on meaning here.
Every student hates a professor.
So this could mean every student
hates at least one professor that they've
had, whoever that may well be.
I can visualize that person very, very
clearly for me. But still,
every student hates one professor,
whoever that may be. And every student might
hate a different professor. So that's
possible. The other option is everybody
hates one professor and his name is
Will Styler. Every student at UCSD
who's had me just hates me directly.
So every student hates a
professor versus every
student hates a professor
in their life. Right? So there are either
many professors being hated,
or it's just me. Not sure.
Hopefully not this one, right? We'll see.
Let me know at the end of the quarter
in the course evaluations. So anyways,
there are other types of ambiguity.
Oh God.
Anyways, moving on.
I want tenure, please.
There are other types of ambiguity, though,
out there in the world, but these are the big three you want to know.
Lexical ambiguity, where it hinges
on word sense. Structural,
or syntactic
ambiguity, where you can't figure out
what syntactic structure is intended,
and that's why it's ambiguous. And then semantic
ambiguity, where you can't figure out which
interpretation is intended
without additional context.
All of these can be solved by context,
but the difference is word sense,
syntactic structure, and multiple
interpretations, any of which could be
right, given the lexical and syntactic
structure. So let's try this.
Let's work on this together.
Let's look at this example sentence.
I see Kim and Latasha eating ice cream.
Wait, I think she dropped her spoon.
Is this A, lexical ambiguity,
B, syntactic ambiguity, or
C, semantic ambiguity? Think about
it for a second.
Okay, so
if this were lexical, there would
have to be some kind of
word sense distinction here, and
there isn't, really. I see Kim and Latasha
eating ice cream. All of those are
pretty straightforward. Wait, I think she dropped her spoon.
No, that's completely fine.
Syntactic would have to be structural,
right? There'd have to be some element of this
where the tree would differ.
Instead, what this is ambiguous
on the basis of is, who is she?
Is it Kim or is it Latasha?
And we don't know that. This isn't something
that's resolved through syntax or through the lexicon,
so this is a semantic ambiguity.
We're not sure which of these is which,
but there's not a word sense
or a structure thing that would help us.
How about this one? The bear ate the hikers with ketchup.
Is this A, lexical
ambiguity, B, syntactic ambiguity,
or C,
semantic?
So,
first off, what's the ambiguity?
Well, the question here is,
there are two reads. The bear ate the hikers
and the bear put ketchup
on the hikers as he ate them.
The other possibility is that
there were three sets of hikers.
One was carrying ketchup, one was carrying mustard,
and one was carrying relish, and the bear ate the hikers
with ketchup. Those are two
different possibilities.
This is a syntactic
ambiguity. We don't know,
we don't care about word sense here.
We know what the bear did, we know what ketchup is,
we know what hikers are, that's fine.
The issue here
is fundamentally structural.
Is the prepositional phrase,
the with ketchup, attaching to the eating
or is it attaching to the hikers?
Is it a part of the noun phrase? Is it the hikers
with ketchup, or is it ate the hikers
with ketchup?
That's the big thing, and that's syntactic
structural ambiguity.
John loves his mother, and so do I.
Lexical, A,
syntactic, B, semantic,
C.
This one's pretty straightforward, because it's a lot
like some of the examples we've seen before.
Again, there's not a question of lexical ambiguity
here, because we know
what all these words mean. Syntactically speaking,
it's not hard. This is actually very similar to
the John kissed his wife and so did
Mark thing. This is a semantic ambiguity.
I don't know, based on this
sentence, whether I love John's mother
or whether I love my mother
and John loves his mother, or maybe both.
But either way, semantic ambiguity is a thing.
How about this one? I saw this
killer robot circling general
dynamics. A, lexical,
B, syntactic, C, semantic.
So, general dynamics,
for those of you who aren't familiar, is a
company they're based not so far away from the campus,
like a few blocks
north of campus. They are folks who develop
drones, among other
things. So, in this
case, there is a real ambiguity here.
Either it is a lexical,
a syntactic, or a semantic ambiguity.
Syntactically speaking, nothing too fancy
here, right? There's a
N, or NP,
VP, and then a big old
NP over here.
So, that's not the issue here.
The big thing here is killer,
right? This could be killer in the sense
of, man, I saw this killer robot, it was
awesome, and it just
flies around and it hugs hummingbirds
and then lets them go, and then they feel better
and the robot feels good. It's sweet!
That's a killer robot.
Or there is a killer robot, meaning this
robot hunts people down and kills them, and it was
circling general dynamics. Either way,
this is a lexical ambiguity.
We don't know what killer means
in this case, and therefore
it is lexically ambiguous.
There's not a syntactic or a semantic ambiguity
there. So, ambiguity is
when the meaning isn't clear, and it can be
because the words themselves are unclear,
it can be because the structure is unclear,
or because we just need more information
in order to be able to interpret the sentence
independently of those two other things.
So, let's talk about
the opposite. Let's talk about really clear meaning.
Okay, so entailment
is when there is a necessary
meaning relationship between
two sentences. So, for instance,
let's think about it this way.
There is a relationship of entailment between
two sentences when the use
of a sentence involves logical
and necessary conclusions that can be drawn
from it. Saying, if
this sentence is true, then necessarily
this second sentence is true,
that is an entailment relationship.
If you cannot imagine a situation
which X being true does
not mean Y is true. So,
okay, for instance, Sam broke the
red toy and the blue toy.
This is a sentence, right?
What sentences might this entail?
Given that this top sentence
is true, what other sentences are
necessarily also true?
So, this sentence entails
the red toy is broken.
There is no way that you can say
Sam broke the red toy and the blue toy
and the red toy is
not broken. You said up here
Sam broke the red toy, so the red toy
is thus broken. It is entailed. It is
necessarily true. There is no universe
in which the red toy
here is not broken.
Similarly, the blue toy is broken.
Sam broke it too.
So, this sentence up top entails
this second sentence.
It is a necessary thing.
Sam broke two toys.
This is also entailed by this pair
of sentences, right?
There are two toys here and both of them were
broken, therefore Sam broke two toys.
Sam is capable of
breaking toys. If we are
saying that Sam broke toys, then
Sam is capable of breaking toys.
This is necessarily true.
There is no universe
in which this is true and this isn't.
However, there are lots of things that
are not entailed by this sentence.
So, for instance, you might look at this
and you might think, wow, what a jerk.
But it is not necessarily true that Sam broke the
red toy and the blue toy. Maybe Sam
was playing around and then fell
over onto the red toy and blue toy
and broke those toys.
So, it is possible that it wasn't intentional.
Therefore, this sentence is not
necessarily true.
We do not know the ordering here.
It is not necessarily true that
Sam broke the red toy first. Maybe the blue toy
got broken first. We don't know
whether Sam likes breaking toys. Maybe this made
him very, very sad, right? Breaking
the toy made Sam very sad.
But, nonetheless,
it happened, right?
We also don't know that these were Sam's toys,
right? It could have been somebody else's toys.
Sam was at preschool and broke
toys that belonged to the people,
right? Sam broke
the people's toys. Sad.
So, all of these things are not necessarily
entailed by this sentence.
All of these things are.
So, let's practice a little bit more.
Mary passionately kissed Blake.
This would entail that
Mary kissed Blake. No way around that.
There is no universe in which
that is not true. Blake was
kissed by Mary. Again, absolutely
100% true. If Mary
kissed Blake, then the passive version,
Blake was kissed by Mary, is also true.
It is also true that Blake was kissed.
If Blake was kissed up here,
Blake was kissed. This is true.
And then Mary touched Blake with her lips.
There is no way that you can kiss somebody
without touching them with your lips,
right? You can
make weird arguments
that redefine the nature of kissing,
but fundamentally, kissing is about
touching somebody with your lips, and therefore
if Mary kissed Blake, then she
touched him with her lips, right?
But this doesn't entail
this sentence.
Think to yourself for a second.
Why could this have happened
without this being true?
So, it's true that generally speaking,
passionate kissing arises from love
or some kind of romantic thing, but it
could be that, for instance, Mary is
a secret spy, and is
trying to get nuclear secrets out of Blake,
and so she passionately is seducing him
to try and get him to talk about nuclear
secrets. And so, Mary doesn't
love Blake, but she's still passionately kissing him
as a means to an end, right?
It could be,
or, okay, how about Mary married Blake?
Yeah, no, not necessarily.
You can be in love with somebody and not marry them,
and you can passionately kiss somebody
that you would never marry, right? That's a possibility,
right? So, that's not necessarily
true. This is not an entailment
relationship. Blake kissed Mary.
So, kissing is
not necessarily symmetrical. Somebody
could kiss you on the cheek, and it's true that
they kissed you, but you didn't kiss them.
So, this is not an entailment relationship.
Mary kissed Blake
many times. It could just be one
passionate kiss before she
gets on the plane to go back home,
and they never kissed again.
So, Mary kissed Blake
many times is not entailed here. There is
another universe in which that could be the case.
And by the way, it also doesn't entail that
Mary did not kiss Blake.
This is contradictory, but it's not
entailed, right? There's a bunch of things that
are not entailed by this sentence. I mean, it
is also not entailed by this sentence that
Iceland is a very
nice place to visit, right?
It is true. That's
not entailed. There are a lot of things
that are not entailed by sentences, but we tend
to list the ones that are
most common, most likely, right?
So, okay. One thing to note
here is that there is not symmetry.
Much like with kissing, there is not symmetry with
entailment. Saying X entails
Y is not the same thing as
saying that Y entails X.
You cannot swap these things around.
So, Mary passionately
kissed Blake entails that
Mary kissed Blake. This is easy.
There's no way around that. However,
the opposite is not true.
Saying Mary kissed Blake does not entail
that she passionately kissed Blake.
Maybe she gave Blake a very chaste peck on the
cheek, right? That's not super
passionate, but it's
so we don't know. Or
maybe she dispassionately kissed
Blake. That'd be weird, right? Anyways,
these two things
entail each other. These two things
do not. And so, the fact that one
sentence entails the other does not
imply the inverse. It does not mean
that the other sentence will entail itself.
So, entailment also
does not depend on context
or on situations. The only thing
that entailment needs is the meanings
of the words to stay the same.
If you start changing the meaning of the word
from the sentence to the thing it entails,
then you're... that's a different
game. You're not playing the game anymore.
Entailment doesn't depend, though, on
context. It doesn't depend on situation.
Some of the things I was just giving you
earlier here, like, oh, well, maybe
Marie was a, you know, a Soviet spy.
That's old reference. Anyways,
maybe she was a spy.
That's a context thing, right?
That's something really weird in the
actual world. That depends
on situation. It depends on context.
But entailment, for something to be
truly entailed, there is no
situation. There is no context in which
it is not entailed. So, John left
the room. It does not
entail that the room is empty afterwards.
Because maybe John left the room, but
in practice, John could have left
the room and there were 50 other people in there, right?
So, that's important.
Marie and John were in the room.
John left the room. Therefore, it's not
entailed that it was empty afterwards.
If I say John was alone in the room
and then John left the room,
then that would mean, yes, it's true.
The room would be empty afterwards.
So, context can make this
true or false, but at the
same time, it's not entailment
anymore. Entailment is true only
if you cannot imagine any world in which
it could be false.
Like Mary kissed Blake
can never not entail that Blake
was kissed by Mary. There is no situation
to make that false. If it depends on the
context, it's something different.
That different thing is called implicature.
We'll talk more about implicature later
on, but if something is suggested
very strongly by a sentence,
but there are situations in which it might not be true,
it's not entailment. It's an implicature.
Let's test this. Roberta
hit Carlos using a rubber chicken.
Which of the following is not
entailed? A. Carlos
was hit by a rubber chicken. B. Roberta
had a rubber chicken. C. Roberta
dislikes Carlos. D. Roberta
was within rubber chicken
hitting distance of Carlos.
E. Roberta hit Carlos.
Go ahead and pause. If you don't have an answer yet,
then come back.
Okay.
So, Roberta hit Carlos
using a rubber chicken.
Carlos was hit by a rubber chicken.
Yep. That's
easy. That's entailed. We know that
Carlos was hit. We know that a rubber chicken was
used. Therefore, Carlos was hit by a rubber
chicken. No other universe.
Roberta had a rubber chicken.
Now, depending on the meaning of had,
but at the very, very least, I'm not saying
she owned it. Maybe it was a borrowed rubber chicken,
but at the very least she had a rubber chicken
at the time that she hit Carlos with it.
So, this one is entailed.
She was able to use a rubber chicken to hit that.
Roberta dislikes Carlos.
Hmm. Interesting.
So, in this case, can we think
of a situation in which that could not
be true? Sure.
Maybe Roberta was flirting with Carlos
and rubber chicken flirting is a
very common thing in whatever culture they're
working within.
Or maybe Roberta and Carlos
were in a play and in
the biggest scene,
Roberta rushes at Carlos with a
rubber chicken and takes him out.
In which case, she might not dislike Carlos
at all. They're just actors, right?
So, that one we have some
counter examples for. Roberta was
within rubber chicken hitting distance of Carlos.
This is true. You could picture a
weird world in which Roberta used
some kind of an internet mediated rubber
chickening service with a mechanical
arm, but still, she was able to
do so. She was able to use the rubber chicken
to hit it. Okay with that.
And then Roberta hit Carlos. Yeah.
It says it right in the sentence. It's entailed, right?
So, the correct answer here is
C. That is not entailed.
That is implied, perhaps.
Generally speaking, you don't hit your friends with rubber chickens.
Actually, generally speaking, you don't hit people
with rubber chickens. Nonetheless,
this is implied
rather than entailed.
So, Demetrius saw the kid
who was walking down the street. Which of
the following is entailed by this sentence?
A.
Demetrius was within line of sight
of the kid. B. Demetrius
saw a child.
C. Demetrius was on
the street. D.
The kid was walking.
E. Demetrius was
older than the kid.
Think about this for a second, pause, and be careful.
Okay. So, A.
Demetrius was within line sight
of the kid. Is there a universe
in which this could be false?
Yes. Potentially.
You've got a,
um, let's say you've got a
webcam, right? You're not within line of
sight, necessarily, but you are able to
see the kid. So, this one
is not an entailment. B.
Actually, here, let's go to E.
Demetrius was older than the kid.
Is this entailed? No.
Because this could be, I mean, I can say
something, I can call somebody a kid who's older than me.
That works. So, you don't
necessarily know those things. Maybe they were both
the same age, but they were both kids.
So, Demetrius saw the kid, right?
The kid was walking.
That one looks pretty
good, right? The kid who was walking down the street.
Yeah. The kid was walking.
So, therefore, that one's
an entailment, right? Why isn't
Demetrius was on the street? Well, maybe Demetrius
was in their house using a telescope.
And then, finally, a lot of people get
out of shape with, like, wait a second, Demetrius saw a child.
Yeah, that one's entailed, too.
Not necessarily.
Because there's a syntax,
I'm sorry, there's a lexical ambiguity here.
Kid can
either mean a child
or a small goat.
So, in this case, it could
be that Demetrius saw a small goat
walking down the street, and he didn't
see a child. So, in this case, the only
thing that is entailed guaranteed
here is the kid was walking.
So, yeah. Making
assumptions is bad.
Okay, that was mean.
I'm sorry. But, anyways, understanding
entailment is both
kind of cool, right? It gets us a sense
of true, true meaning
of, like, security in meaning that
we don't generally think about when we're dealing with language,
right? But it requires
you to understand meanings of the words very
precisely. So, for instance, I
talked to a buddy of mine. Folks who really, really
love things like entailment
and precision in meaning lawyers.
Talked to a buddy of mine, and
I asked him, you know, Nathan, tell me.
I say, Nathan is a district attorney.
Does this entail that Nathan is
an attorney? Yes, that does.
You cannot be a district attorney,
meaning the prosecutor in an
area, without being an attorney as well.
That is an entailment.
However, Nathan is a district attorney
also entails that Nathan is a
lawyer. That's fine. That one works.
It does not entail,
if I say Nathan is an attorney, it doesn't entail
that he's a district attorney. There are lots of
attorneys who are not district attorneys.
Also, interestingly,
and this one shocked me,
Nathan is an attorney does not entail
that Nathan is a lawyer. Because
apparently, and actually we
know this, you can get power of attorney
for a person. If somebody is incapacitated
or unable to conduct their financial
affairs on their own, you can get power
of attorney for that person.
This allows you to act in their stead,
to be an attorney for them,
although you are not a lawyer.
You are not their legal attorney.
Saying that Nathan is an attorney does not
imply that Nathan is a lawyer.
This is really specific.
This is getting into the legal definitions
of attorney versus lawyer.
This is getting into the definitions of district
attorney versus attorney, and lawyer
and attorney. This requires
very firm
understanding of specific terms.
Part of the reason why entailment
is very difficult is because it requires
these really, really fine-grained
knowledge of the meanings of words.
This is part of the reason why legalese is difficult.
They spend all this time defining individual
words exactly for this reason,
so that things can be entailed.
Entailment is cool, but it requires
detailed understanding of what you are talking about here.
In a different legal system, these things
might be defined differently. Maybe in another country,
power of attorney does not exist, so
all attorneys are lawyers. In some cases,
you get barristers who might not be lawyers.
I don't know.
This is very system-specific, and it requires
you to understand the meanings of these words
in the system you are in.
Meaning is really complicated.
So far, we have been talking about meaning
in terms of the dictionary meaning.
We have been talking about meaning in terms of
what this thing means
at its very core.
The raw meaning of this word.
But there is a different kind of meaning
that we have, and this is connotation and denotation.
In fact, there are a lot of ways
of saying the same thing.
We will talk more about this a little bit later on,
but words that mean exactly the same thing
are referred to generally as synonyms.
There are words like sofa
and couch, which for most people
are synonyms. I had a furniture designer
in 101 at one point
inform me that no, they are not exactly the same thing,
but for most people in common parlance,
sofa and couch
mean the same thing. I can say,
hey, nice sofa, and I can say,
hey, nice couch, and they mean the same.
Similarly, run and dash
are synonyms for most people.
I dashed out in the rain,
I ran out in the rain. They are not different.
Again, I have had runners say, no, no, no,
these things mean different things in
Olympic context, but for most people,
these are synonyms. Sick and
ill, in the classical senses,
both mean
to be unwell, to be unhealthy.
And they are synonyms.
I was very sick. I was very ill.
Those mean roughly the same thing.
Police officer and cop generally
are viewed to mean exactly the same thing.
There is not differences there.
Synonyms can be tested.
You can say something like, all sofas are
couches, and all couches are sofas.
To me, this is accurate. This is perfectly fine.
Maybe not to an interior designer, but it is for me.
John purchased a car,
therefore he bought a car.
I'm okay with this. This seems perfectly
reasonable. Saying purchasing
is the same thing as buying, those are synonyms
for me. All sick people
are ill, and all ill people
are sick. Yeah, this works.
Absolutely, 100%.
All police officers are cops, and all cops are
police officers. Again, these are
just saying the same thing.
There is almost a tautology here
going on. Now, let's
look at another set of words that are not
strictly speaking synonyms, or they might
be in a wider sense, but
that also mean the same thing.
Cheap and inexpensive.
Do these mean
exactly the same thing?
Probably not,
right? Cheap has a different
feeling. If somebody goes out and
they say, oh, did you get a
broom? Yeah, I got a pretty inexpensive
one. What does that mean?
It means they didn't pay a lot of money. There's not a strong
value judgment on it.
If somebody says, did you get a broom? Yeah, I got a
cheap one. What does that mean?
Generally, there's
this feeling of, like, it's not a very
good one. Cheap generally means, like,
eh, the quality isn't quite there.
So, cheap generally means
poor quality. Inexpensive doesn't
have that meaning. It could be poor quality,
or it could be great quality. But cheap carries
that connotation. It has that
secondary meaning. Same thing with
strong-willed, stubborn, and pig-headed.
You would describe somebody you like
as being very strong-willed, right?
You might describe somebody that, you know,
okay, they got their ups and their downs, as being
stubborn. And you might describe somebody that
you really dislike as being pig-headed.
All of these things mean
the same thing. They're reluctant to change their
decisions. They have very strong
feelings, and they will push through them
with them, but you would call it different things
depending on your feeling. And it would
be very weird to say, you know, oh,
I love my wife. She can be so pig-headed
when she knows what she wants.
Like, eh, that
sounds really wrong, right?
But if I said she can be very strong-willed when she
wants, that can be a nice thing, right?
Those are two different things.
Study versus scrutinize.
These mean functionally very similar things.
Like, I studied somebody's homework.
I looked very carefully at it. Yeah.
I scrutinized somebody's homework. I looked very carefully
at it. But scrutinize generally means
I'm looking for something wrong, right?
There's a secondary meaning of like, eh,
I don't like this. Scrutinizing, you're
trying to find a problem. So these
mean roughly the same thing, but this one has a different
connotation. Curious
versus nosy. My curious
neighbor looked in the window. Okay.
That's fine. Whatever. My nosy neighbor
looked in the window. Not so fine.
Not so good. So curious
versus nosy are very different.
Vintage versus outdated
versus antique. Apparently,
and I didn't know this, but in the
in the antiquing
world, vintage has a different time period
than antique. But for most people,
I could say, for instance, oh, I love
vintage clothing. I don't...
Sure, I love vintage clothing.
But that's different from saying I love outdated
clothing. Outdated might
mean like this is...
I don't even know what clothing is
outdated. I am not the most
fashionable human you'll ever meet. Just...
Yeah. So, bad metaphor.
But still, outdated generally is not
the same thing as vintage. Vintage is usually
fashionable, right? And antique
generally means like I'm dressing up at
one of those photo booths at a state
fair to look like I'm in the 1800s
or something like that. So all
of these things mean old, right? All of these
things mean no longer popular.
But antique and vintage and outdated
carry different connotations.
So all of these words
share a denotation. All of these
mean the same thing.
These both mean not much money.
All three of these mean unlikely
to change their opinion. These both
mean looked carefully at. These both
mean very interested in
things that are going on outside of
their normal realm. And all three of these
things mean old, but they share
different connotations. They have different
things that they kind of mean.
So, very interesting.
These are really
cool because they're shades
of meaning that can be very difficult to
work with in things like translation and life
generally speaking. And so
we have to think about connotation
and denotation as we're making choices.
And so we can differentiate
these things. Denotation
is the dictionary definition.
The connotation describes the non-definitional
stuff, the emotional stuff, the associated
facts about how a word is often used.
These are usually value judgments.
These are things like, this is not okay,
this is okay. Or they're links to
related concepts.
Facts about usage. How this word
is generally used, more than facts about
definition. Cheap implies
not great. Inexpensive does not.
So if we look at these three things, the denotation
is unlikely to change
their path. Strong-willed might have
a connotation of like good leader.
Like unable to be pushed out of their way
by life circumstance.
Pig-headed might have the connotation of, you know,
God, this person is super stubborn to a
fault. Like they're so
stubborn that it's dumb. They will hurt
themselves just to be right. And stubborn
just means like this is a person who
really resists changing
their viewpoint or their opinion.
So let's try a couple of sets on our own
here. Think about all
of these words. All of these
words are terms that can be used for
a person who is very, very thin.
So you could say something like, that person
is thin, that person is gaunt, lanky,
skinny, or slender.
All of those technically mean
thin. But which of these
have a negative connotation? Look at it for a
second and think.
Generally
speaking, at least in a fashion
world, and again, this
is problematic in a bunch of different
ways, but generally speaking,
saying somebody is very slender
is a positive thing
that you might say about them if you are,
you know, if you appreciate that body type.
And maybe skinny is also fine.
And lanky can also have positive
connotations. But saying that somebody
is super thin is a
little less so. It's a little bit more
neutral. And saying somebody is gaunt is like,
ooh, you know, you look sick.
Do you need help? So you
would generally use different ones of these
depending on what you're talking about. If you're
in the fashion industry where that is viewed
as an ideal for body for whatever
reason, you might say, oh, wow, this person
looks very slender. But if you're in the
medical industry and somebody walks in
and you're like, oh, wow, how are you standing? You might
say this person is gaunt. And so
those are very different things. And you would use
a different word depending on the connotation.
How about this set? Aggressive, assertive,
domineering, dynamic, forceful, and
pushy. Each of these guys
can be used in different contexts.
It's roughly the same thing, although
given with slightly different shades, but
still, which ones of these would you use
positively? You might say,
oh, she's a dynamic leader.
Or, oh, he's very forceful when he
knows what he wants. Or he's very assertive.
He's able to push, you know,
for what he's after there.
Whereas domineering, saying, oh, he's
a really domineering boss, that's not a good
thing. You wouldn't say that about somebody
you particularly like, necessarily.
Or, oh, he's very pushy.
Never is really a great thing.
You wouldn't say, oh, this person's
a great boss. They're so pushy.
That feels really off.
Or, this person's a great boss. They're very aggressive.
Maybe. Aggressive
can kind of be in the middle area, right?
Because that can be a very positive thing, for instance,
for an athlete, or for
somebody in an industry that's
very, well, aggressive. Whereas
for an academic, maybe it's not as much.
This is going to vary, again, based on usage.
You're more likely to see assertive
in the workplace than aggressive.
And those, by the way, aren't exactly the same thing.
The dictionary definition, maybe this is
defending boundaries, this is attacking.
But still, they can be used interchangeably
in some situations. And you're likely
to see one of these in a workplace, whereas
you might not see it in another one.
Unattractive, homely,
plain, frumpy, ugly, and unsightly.
All of these things are ways of calling
somebody not super hot, right?
And so, each one of these are going to
be a little bit different. Homely is probably,
I don't know if that's nicer,
or unattractive, or frumpy,
or plain. I don't know, but you might
use these in different contexts, right?
You have an unsightly
scar. That could be a possibility.
But you
probably wouldn't say, oh, that's a homely
scar. That doesn't make sense.
And similarly, that shirt is unattractive.
You know,
oh, it's purple and
orange flannel.
That's unattractive. I don't know, maybe that's in
fashion these days. But you
wouldn't say, oh, that shirt is very frumpy.
These have their own facts
about usage. And some words
have connotations associating them with very
specific contexts, whether those contexts
are social, cultural, or
just linguistic, even.
So, for instance, thug, here in the US, has
a very specific racial connotation
here in general use. If you call somebody
a thug, well, okay,
let's put it this way. In the news, for instance,
when somebody is referred to as a thug, very often
there is a specific race involved.
It's usually a person of color.
Let's just be real here.
So thug has gotten a racial connotation
in general use. Similarly,
if you call somebody a lib,
here in the US, this is
often used as a shortening for liberal.
Generally speaking, you don't call
somebody a lib who you
respect. You would use this term
if you are not liberal and you dislike people
who are liberal. You would call somebody that
and it wouldn't make sense for a newspaper to print
Bernie Sanders is a well-known lib
politician. It is true that he is a
relatively liberal politician,
but it would be weird to say that he is a lib
politician. This is different.
This has a very different connotation there.
And sometimes we even take steps to
avoid negative connotations. This is
a euphemism, an indirect and
very pretty way to refer to something that is
unpleasant or embarrassing that has
a negative connotation.
So, a euphemism is another
way of saying something negative
that doesn't have that
connotation, that doesn't have as much negativity
to it. So, for instance, in the military
you might see, we neutralized three
enemies rather than we killed three
soldiers or we killed three people.
This is a euphemism for
to kill. Although in some cases it
could be, you know, there are other approaches, but still
generally speaking, this is going to mean
we killed three people. We expect
another round of downsizing
rather than you all are going to get
fired, right? These
are effectively meaning the same
thing, but this
here is a much prettier way to say it.
Could you point me to the powder room?
It's a very nice way of saying
I've got to pee, right?
A recent one, actually,
the Linguistic Society of America's
Word of the Year, just in
terms of noteworthiness, was
Tender Age Shelter, which
is a detention camp for small
children. This was coined here in the U.S.
And actually a word that we've seen over and over
again in 2020 is unprecedented,
which everybody knows is
a euphemism for really fucked up,
right? And so all of these things
are a thing. So a euphemism
is a way to make something sound
prettier than it actually is.
And so these kinds
of things are very real, and the
connotations can actually change over time.
So for instance, let's take this sequence
of words. Originally,
so there was a class of people who we would now refer
to as mentally or developmentally
disabled. Originally,
the term that was used in the medical
community, the unmarked, completely
neutral term for these people,
the term that we would use in the same sense that we say
mentally or developmentally disabled,
the term that was originally used was imbecile.
Now, that has
a very strong negative connotation.
It would be very, very cruel to call somebody who
is mentally disabled an imbecile.
Then the term became idiot,
because imbecile itself became,
it got a negative connotation. People were like,
oh, well, you're calling those people that.
I'm going to call other people who aren't of that
type that, and it'll become a
negative thing. And so then people realized, oh,
that word now is bad. Let's switch
to a new one. We'll use idiot. And so
for a while, that was the term. And in fact,
Dostoevsky has a book that's often translated
The Idiot. And
in many ways, that's a reflection.
At that time, idiot was the
proper term, right, for
that. So we have imbecile
then became idiot
after imbecile got a negative connotation. Then, as we
all know, idiot has gotten that connotation. Now, you can
call anybody an idiot, and it would be very cruel
to call somebody who is actually developmentally
disabled an idiot. And so then they
moved to slow. And then that got a
negative connotation, and they moved to retarded.
And now retarded has a negative connotation,
so you went to mentally handicapped. And then
handicapped got a negative connotation, so now it's
developmentally or mentally disabled.
And guess what? There's going to be another one.
By the end of my career, hopefully I'll have two
more on this slide. It's going to be amazing.
But every time somebody starts
using a word in a negative sense, it will
start picking up a negative connotation.
So this phenomenon of euphemism
turning into a negative term
and then being replaced is called the
euphemism treadmill, because we are
constantly creating new euphemisms
over and over and over again. Another
euphemism, another euphemism, another euphemism.
Over and over again
until eventually
we have to come up with a new one, right? And so
it's never ending. It never stops.
It's a treadmill. And so
we have these other intuitions here. Synonyms
are weird because if you invite someone to your cottage
in the forest, it's nice and cozy, but
if you invite them to a cabin in the woods, you're going to
die, right? I don't even know
how this got this. I think there's maybe a movie
Cabin in the Woods, but this is just
a very good knowledge of synonyms
and connotations.
Here's a really good one.
Today I asked my class to come up with
a pair of terms that share a denotative meaning
but whose connotative meanings differ, and
one student offered butt dial, another
offered booty call, and anyways
that student's the professor now.
By the way, the reason I read these things
aloud is in case I have a student who's blind
who can't necessarily see the slides.
That's why I read all of these and the questions aloud
too. So this is great
because we have two words that mean
exactly the same thing in terms
of denotation. Butt and booty
both refer to your backside, right?
And dial and call
have roughly the same meaning here
but they very, very
much differ in terms of connotation. A butt dial
at least in my language
is when somebody accidentally calls you
because their phone turned on and then
dialed you from their pocket. So that would be
a butt dial versus a booty call is when you
call somebody who is
well, who you're interested in having
an encounter with. Usually late at night
that would be a booty call. How's that for a
euphemism? Interested in having an encounter
with. Which of course we know means
you want to have sex with. So anyways
nonetheless these two things have
very different connotative meanings but very
similar denotative meanings and now that's not
funny anymore. Sorry.
So the lines here can be very, very
blurry because you could actually consider
butt dial and booty call to be compounds
right? They are two chunks of their
words that are stuck together as
compounds. Evidence for this
would be can you booty text somebody?
Yeah, generally speaking when I've asked this
in class people agree yes booty text is okay
but text is a little weirder
but you can kind of get around that right? You could
butt message somebody on
Instagram or like I was in my
discord channel with my phone in my pocket
so I butt emojied the server
that's kind of weird
or are they adjective and noun
pairs right? Is that what's going
on here? And how flexible is
this by the way? Can you booty telegram somebody?
Is that a thing?
Yeah, I mean all of
these things we have to ask are these specific
compounds or are these pairs? Either
way it's blurry but
this is definitely a case where there are big connotation
differences. Similarly ambulance
chaser versus personal injury lawyer
People who dislike
these groups of people will call them ambulance
chasers. People in the field will call
them personal injury lawyers. Well actually I've got a friend
who's a personal injury lawyer who calls himself an
ambulance chaser. So you know what? It works.
When does idiot stop
meaning an intellectually disabled person
and start just meaning a stupid person?
Like at what point does that lose
its original meaning? Does it lose its original
connotation or later
on its denotation? Because right now if I call
somebody an idiot I'm not implying anything
about their cognitive
status. I'm just saying they're acting
dumbly right? I'm an idiot all the time
right? And so that's
a thing. So at what point did that
happen? So it's very
hard on occasion to figure out which of the many
options carries the best meaning
carries the best choice of meaning for you
But the thing is this is
this gets at a bigger question right?
That even a single word can be very
hard to define. And so as
we're thinking about this I'd like to bring up one last
kind of idea here.
That is the idea of a prototype.
What is a given
what does the true meaning of
a word look like?
We have these ideas about what words mean
right? If I say the word bird
you can think of something right?
Maybe yeah maybe you're
thinking of a specific bird. Maybe you're thinking
of a bird that you had when you were a kid. Who knows?
If I say chair you're probably thinking of a specific
chair. Maybe the one you're in right now
or at the very least a specific type of
chair. You have a chair kind of in your mind.
Is it one chair? Maybe.
Or it could be something more generic but it's not
necessarily clear. We also
have these really strong intuitions about
whether a word describes an object or
not. But these intuitions are not
necessarily binary. So what I'd like
you to go on ahead and do is just to
work with me here and
we're going to think about what a bird is.
And I'd like you to kind of think to yourself
how birdy, on a scale from
1 to 5 or A to E if you'd
like, how birdy is this thing right here?
Is this a bird?
Is this a really good bird?
Is this like a 1 out of
5, well I guess it'd be 5 out of 5
high end bird versus a
1 out of 5, that's hardly birdy.
Most people, this little guy
is pretty damn birdy. Little owl sparrow here
birdy as heck, right? How about this guy?
How's that on the birdy scale?
For a lot of people, that feels
pretty damn birdy too, right?
That's birdtastic.
How about this guy?
Most people are like, ooh
yeah
two legs
feathers
beak
bird?
So that's not a super convincing
bird for a lot of people, although most people will admit
that's still a bird, right?
How about this little dude? Cute
eh, moderately birdy. Doesn't fly
but still has wings, still has
feathers, still on two legs
it's birdish, maybe a 3 out of 5
something like that. How birdy is this thing?
You'd be like, well, that's a
koala. That's a 0.
For most people, this is not a bird. You feel
very strongly that this is not birdy.
Even if the emu back there was
an ostrich, this might be an ostrich.
Even if this ostrich is not a
this is a bird, this absolutely
is not. Like, that could be a weird bird
but this is not a bird. This is a non-bird.
How about this little dude right here? This is a kiwi.
Um, that's right, it's not just a
fruit. Um, and that's not
the nature of the fruit, by the way.
You don't cut that open and see green and seeds.
You just see bird.
Um, so anyways, yeah, this is a kiwi
flightless, damn near wingless
What are we looking at here?
Probably not a super
high-rated bird, but it's still birdy to
most people, right? How about this dude?
Yeah, it's pretty damn birdy, right? It's 2 out of 5
1 out of 5, er, I'm sorry, 5 out of 5 sort of bird.
Swans are birds
flat out. Um, and so we
have these really strong intuitions about
for instance, birds. Like, this is a
bird, absolutely, but it's not a
really good bird.
Versus this is the birdiest damn bird I can
imagine. Uh, we have these strong feelings
and it's not just birds. We think about chairs, right?
So, is this a chair?
Yeah, for most people, this is like a 5
out of 5 chair. Like, yeah, that is
chair-y as heck. Maybe you'd give it a more specific
term. You'd call it an armchair.
Or a recliner. Actually, it doesn't look like it reclines.
I don't know. Either way,
this is a chair. 100%, this would
feel like a chair. How about this?
It's a
chair. You could sit in it, right?
You put your butt in the middle right here
and then it supports you, so
that's a chair, but it's not a
super chair-y chair. That's like a 2 out of
5, 1 out of 5 chair.
How about this guy?
Most people are going to be like, well,
that's a throne. And, true,
true, this is a throne, but a throne is a type
of chair, right? So, it's not a
great chair, but it's chair-ish, right?
Not in the sense that you cherish it,
but it's chair-ish.
It's chair-y. How about this guy?
Yeah, that's all
cardboard, but it is
technically speaking a chair.
It works as a chair, so
that's chair-ish, right? But it's
not a great chair, either. This guy.
Sit in the middle of it. Probably
a bunch of you have it in a dorm.
Yeah, it's a chair. Not the
most chair-y chair, but it's there. This is a
chair, oddly enough. According to a website,
this is a chair. You put an
exercise ball in this thing and then lean
against the back. That's a chair.
Ish. 1 out of 5?
How about a series of pizza
boxes duct-taped together to a suitable height?
No?
Speaking of
things that might be in your dorm,
for most people, this doesn't count as a chair.
Even though you could sit on it.
Even though it absolutely works to support your
weight while you're at a table, this is not
a chair to most people.
How about this? Oh, yeah. 5 out of 5,
that's a chair. 1000% chair.
So what this gives us is the sense of
a prototype. An example of a given
word or a given meaning that is really central
to the category. Like that last
chair, this is a chair.
You don't get that much chair-ier
than that. Like, if you
ask anybody to point to chair,
this is what the dictionary will
have in it, right? This is the prototype
of chair. It is a great example
of chair-dom, and you're going to be
hard-pressed to find a chair-ier chair than
that. And so this is the semantic
prototype, you could argue, or it's pretty close
to it. You have this thing that is right
in the middle of the category, as opposed
to these things that are further out from the
edge of the category. They're still chairs, but
they're not great examples of it.
This gets a bunch of different intuitions
for us. If we think about words as
having prototypes and then having things that are
further away, we can acknowledge that
yeah, it's true, but it's not
quite. So the Pope, for instance,
is pretty far from the prototype
for bachelor. Technically, the Pope
is a married... I'm sorry, he's an
unmarried man.
So technically, the Pope would be a bachelor.
But the Pope is
not particularly eligible, as he's usually...
So there are many reasons why
we would not consider the Pope to be a
prototypical bachelor, even if
technically the word kind of does apply.
Right? An emu is
pretty far away from the prototype for bird,
even though technically it is
a bird. And a stack of pizza boxes
is very far away from the prototype
for chair, even if we can acknowledge
that right now it's acting as a chair.
And this gets us into these kinds of debates.
For instance, are sandwiches
dumplings? Are ravioli sandwiches?
Like, okay, is a Pop-Tart a sandwich?
This is a Venn diagram that's been
made simply to anger people. If you'd like,
we can recapitulate this during the discussion
section, just to make people angry.
But absolutely, hot dogs are
sandwiches, raviolis are a type of dumpling.
You know, we can go deep
into this, right?
This whole area
of combat that has developed in the
last few years is based simply on the
idea of prototype. This is a
prototypical sandwich. This is
much less so, and
Pop-Tarts for many people might even fall outside
that category, even though I maintain there is
bread on both sides. If you had a ham and cheese
Pop-Tart, that's a sandwich, right?
Or maybe a calzone. I don't know.
Calzones are just unfried ravioli. Anyways,
I digress. So,
sandwiches can be dumplings, and in which case
that's weird.
So, even within a word, meaning
can be very gradient, right? We can say
this is a bird, but not a great
bird, versus this is a bird that's super birdy.
Right? And a single word can variably
refer to many things. What I hope
this gets across to you is that, although there
are things that we can say for sure, there are things
like tautologies that are just
true, and contradictions that are just false.
And there are things that we can know
are entailed by something else. You know,
these kinds of entailments, John broke the
truck, the truck is broken, that is
pretty clear, right? The meaning
there is not... is very
abundantly clear. Due to things like
ambiguity, and due to things like prototype
effects, meaning is
complicated. We can determine
meaning using fancy semantic
footwork, but even still it's very, very difficult.
We can tell when meaning is unclear
or ambiguous, due to structural, lexical
or just general semantic reasons.
We can tell when entailment happens,
and we know that there's more to a word than its
dictionary definition, but even those
definitions can feel very gradient.
So, that's meaning, at least for the moment.
For next time, we're going to focus on individual
word meanings, and we'll start talking a little bit more
about meaning in context.
I hope next time brings some meaning, and I will
see you for the next video. Thank you very much.
