Hi, everybody. Today we are going to finish up semantics and then transition into pragmatics,
start thinking about meaning in the world itself. But to start with just a cute little
meme, remember, machine translation is really hard, and we don't cover that really at all
in 101, but in Link 6, we start to get there. So yeah, there's that. So let's go ahead and
jump into semantics today. Let's think about how words work in worlds and how they work
generally speaking. So last time we talked very broadly about meaning, right? We talked
about truth in sentences. We talked about ambiguity as a property that some sentences
have and constructions as well. We talked about entailment. When a sentence means something,
what other sentences are also necessarily true? We talked a little bit about shades
of meaning in connotation and denotation, and we also talked about gradients in meaning.
That meaning that some things are birds, but they're not that birdy relative to other ones.
And this is going to be a factor just everywhere in life, right? All of these things, though,
are inherent. Today, we're going to start off, though, by drilling a little bit more
into the meaning of individual words, and then we're going to move our way into conversation,
and more specifically into the elements of conversation that allow our words to have
meaning above and beyond their inherent meaning, the parts of them that are sort of always
true, right? So today's plan is to start off thinking about word-meaning relationships
because that's important. Then we'll go into word sense a little bit more, get deeper
into that question. We'll talk a little bit about lexical semantics, that is the frames
that individual words have. And then we'll talk about pragmatics and the cooperative
principle and introduce the idea of Gricey and Maxims. So word-meaning relationships
are really important, and many of you have probably heard these before. But words have
meanings. Each individual word has something that it means. Whatever that meaning actually
looks like, whatever the words actually... But different words can have very related
meanings, right? Not every word is entirely independent of every other one. And sometimes
it's helpful for us as linguists to think about those relationships more directly, and
to do that by classifying those relationships. And so in 101, we're going to talk about a
few different kinds of relationships that words can have to one another. One of them
is the relationship between synonyms, so words that mean the same thing, and antonyms, words
that are exact opposites. We'll talk about the difference between homonyms and homophones
and what both of those things mean. We'll talk about hyponyms versus hypernyms, and
then we'll talk about metonymy. So a synonym we've already talked about in this class.
These are words that share the same denotational meaning, but have a different spoken form.
So these are things like cop and police officer, sick and ill, sofa and couch. All of those
things are pretty much the same word, right? They may have slight differences in connotation,
and they may have slight differences in actual meaning if you are a super specialist. If
you are an interior designer, maybe sofa and couch are different, but by and large, they
mean the same thing. So those are synonyms. A nice example of a synonym in daily life
is an opportunity drawing. So UCSD, among other organizations, bans a raffle, a raffle
being where you buy a ticket and have a chance to win a prize, right? They are legally complicated
under California law, and in fact, under many, many laws, even online on forums and things
like that, like PayPal will ban you if you try and create raffles. That's not legal advice.
That's just something I've seen to happen. And so people have gotten around this. They've
said, well, of course I wouldn't host a raffle. Those are legally complicated. We're going
to have an opportunity drawing instead, which is similar. In fact, it's pretty much the
same damn thing, but it is not a raffle. And so therefore at UCSD, we're not allowed to
have raffles for organizations or otherwise, but we are allowed opportunity drawings. The
more you know, of course, talk to your lawyer before you arrange any of these kinds of
things, but still it's, this is a good synonym in everyday life because it's, and it's kind
of a euphemism too. If raffle has a negative connotation, this would be a euphemism, a
word that makes it a little bit prettier than the original word. So those are synonyms,
things that mean the same. Antonyms are the opposite, right? It's actually an antonym.
It is a word that has a nearly opposite or a completely opposite denotational meaning.
The meanings of these words are as close as we can get to flipped. So up and down,
this is a case where it is very clearly opposite, right? Up and down mean entirely different
things. Similarly, sick and healthy. Assuming that you mean the sense of sick of like I
am ill, you can not be sick and healthy at the same time. They are opposites. As you
get less sick, you get more healthy. As you get less down, you get more up. Similarly
with happy and sad. One could argue those are antonyms. As you become less happy, you're
growing more sad, dead and alive. In that case, there's not really a less and more
thing, but the opposite of being dead is being alive and vice versa. And then doing and undoing
are exact opposites. I could do something, I can undo it. So antonyms are there. Exactly
opposite can be very difficult, right? I mean, is undoing exactly the same thing as doing
or is not having done at all? Look, I don't want to get too deep into that, but the question
here is, are they pretty much opposite? Because that's good enough for us. So an antonym are
words that are exactly or pretty nearly opposite in meaning. A hyponym and hypernym relationship.
A hyponym is a word that is a very specific instance of a broader class of the hypernym.
So for instance, a poodle is a hyponym of the hypernym dog. So a poodle is a type of
dog. Therefore the hyponym is poodle. The hypernym is dog. A laptop is a kind of computer.
There are many kinds of computers out there. Not all of them are laptops, but laptop is
a hyponym of computer. iPads are a type of tablet. Therefore that is a hyponym of tablet.
And skyscrapers are a type of building, but not all buildings are skyscrapers. So it's
the case, for instance, that all laptops are computers, but it's not the case that all
computers are laptops. So not all skyscrapers are buildings, etc. And so the greater class
here is the hypernym. Think about hyperactive means you're super active. Hypernym means
you have a bigger meaning, right? So hypernym is the greater group. The thing that is smaller
is a hyponym. If I say X is a type of Y, then X is a hyponym, Y is the hypernym. So
these things are pretty common in our daily lives. And we can make a lot of things, I
mean, you know, presentation. This is a type of lecture, right? It's not exactly a lecture,
but it is a hyponym of the broader class lecture. So all of these things are, these happen.
They're common and they're very useful, especially in natural language processing, especially
when we're working with computers, teaching a computer to understand that, oh yeah, laptop,
that's a type of computer, turns out to be really useful knowledge about the world, right?
And then metonymy is if you've got word X and it's related to word Y and you're using
it to represent the same meaning as Y. So this is kind of a weird thing. But take, for
example, this right here. Beijing has rejected the offer. In a, like a governmental context,
what that generally means is that, you know, for instance, Iceland made an offer to China
for something or another, and you would then say Beijing rejected the offer. This is because
Beijing is widely known to be the seat of the Chinese government. You know, I don't
know exactly whether, but you know, Beijing often stands in for the Chinese government
in terms of these kinds of things. We can use the city to refer to a part of the city
that is the people in the government there. Or for instance, we speak several tongues
in this classroom. In this case, there is a lot more to a language than a tongue, right?
And technically, by this definition, ASL would count, even though tongues aren't, I mean,
tongues are involved, but it's not for speaking, so to speak. You can stick your tongue out,
I imagine, in some signs. But nonetheless, a tongue is not exactly equivalent to language
in practice, but it's being used that way in this particular example here. A great example
of metonymy came in Lord of the Rings, when Gimli, everyone was saying, you've got my
support, and Gimli said, and my axe. So this is his way of saying, he's not just saying,
okay, Frodo, take my axe, go to Mordor. No, what he's actually saying is, you have me
as well as my axe. My axe will stand in for me in this sentence. So which one of these
things, let's practice this a little bit. Which one of these is a synonym of large?
As in the sentence, most mountains are large. Synonym here would be A, small, B, big, C,
large as in he was paid 200 large to switch companies, D, large as in a massive corporation
and a small startup, we're both bidding for spectrum, large one as always, and then E,
size. Which one of these is a synonym? Okay, so A, small, that is an antonym, that is the
exact opposite. C, large, this is a different sense of large entirely, right? D, this is
a metonymy use here. Large here is standing in for massive corporations. And then E, large
is sort of a type of size measurement, but this isn't really related. So the answer here
would be big. You could say most mountains are big, most mountains are large. Or you
could do a synonym in test. You could say, all big things are large and all large things
are big. That I think is pretty accurate, right? So these are going to be synonyms.
The answer would be B here. Okay, let's think about sofas again. What is a hypernym of sofas?
The hypernym of sofa would be A, sectional, B, loveseat, C, cushion, D, furniture, E,
living room. Which of these words is a hypernym of the word sofa? So hypernyms are the greater
class, right? A hyponym is a type of hypernym. So in this case, a sectional is a type of
sofa. So that would be a hyponym of sofa. Same thing with a loveseat, I would probably
argue. A cushion is a part of a sofa. And although we'll talk about part-whole relationships,
for instance, in Ling 6, we're not going there for 101. A living room contains a sofa, but
that's different. It's not a kind of sofa. So instead, the hypernym here would be D,
furniture. A furniture, I'm sorry, a sofa is a type of furniture. So D would be the
correct answer here. Okay, so which of the following would be an example of metonymy
in use? So A would be France, in I spent last summer in France. B, the White House, in the
White House has a large security perimeter. C, Susan said it's okay, so we'll use her
place. So Susan there. D, the Dean, in we'll have to see if the Dean approves. And then
E, Geisel, in provided that Geisel agrees, we'll finalize the new library policies next
week. So this one's tricky. Think about it for a second. Pause if you need to. Okay,
so the answer here, A, I spent last summer in France. Metonymy, remember, is where you
use a related term to refer to something else. Here, I spent last summer in France. That
means I was in France. Like France means France there. There is no related word there. The
White House. So the White House is super commonly used for metonymy, right? You would say something
like the White House has refused to discuss this proposal or something like that. And
that actually means the president or the executive branch generally or something like that. But
in this case, it actually refers to the House, right? So that's not metonymy. C, Susan said
it's okay, so we'll use her place. This just means Susan, right? Susan equals Susan. In
D, the Dean, we'll have to see if the Dean approves. Well, presumably we're talking about
a human, right? We're talking about a Dean. We're talking about John Moore. We're talking
about somebody else in the world who is a Dean. And as a result, this is not metonymy.
But here, Geisel is metonymy. It's not the case that the library itself, that the building,
the Geisel Library, has shifted one of its bookshelves to point to yes. This is more
referring to the leadership of the Geisel Library as opposed to, say, the Health Sciences
Library. So in this case, the correct answer would be E. Geisel is a metonymy or is being
used metonymically there. A couple of other forms that we should think about here. Homonyms
are words that share the same spoken and written form but have a different meaning. So these
would be examples of things that historically we've just said these are different senses.
If I say there are two senses of a word, there are two homonyms there. Bank and bank mean
the same thing. But in one case, I mean river. The next case, I mean banking, like a financial
institution. Mug and mug, these are two words that are fundamentally different. They have
different meanings, but they sound exactly the same and they're written the same as well.
So in both of these cases, bank, bank, mug, mug, all written the same. So phone could
either mean an iPhone or it could mean tuh or nuh. Both of those things are homonyms.
They share the same written form and they have different meanings. And the same spoken
form that is, and they have different meanings. A homophone is spelled differently. This is
the important distinction here. Homonyms have the same spelling, different meanings, same
spelling, same pronunciation, different meanings. Homophones have the same spelling, I'm sorry,
have the same pronunciation, have different meanings and are spelled differently. So these
would be things, and technically homonym is a hyponym of homophone, which we're not going
to go there. But still, these are things like there and there. They're pronounced the
same, but, and they have different meanings, but they are spelled differently. So they
are homophones. But and but, in one case it's a conjunction, in one case it's, well, that.
Band and band. Again, these have different meanings, they're spelled differently, but
they are pronounced the same. And then to and to, different meanings spelled differently.
So homophones and homonyms, it's a tricky little distinction, but it's one that's super
important, particularly in computational linguistics, because these are much easier, right? Because
you can see if somebody means but in the sense of backside, but you can't see if somebody
means bank in the sense of river or financial institution. So homophones are very different
than homonyms, but they're actually, there's a fair amount of similarity there. So, okay,
the next thing that's important here, and the thing that this highlights, particularly
the homonym discussion, is that the same words can have different meanings. You can have
one word with many senses. We've talked about this already before, but this is called polysemy.
The idea that one word can have multiple meanings is polysemy, flat out. And it's a useful term,
it's a good idea to think about polysemy generally in the world. And it turns out to be a really
big problem for a lot of applied uses of language, right? So if I have, for instance, this sentence
right here, Roger busted the bank. This is a sentence that is ambiguous, and it's lexically
ambiguous, because this could have two different meanings, right? This could mean that Roger
was driving a really big ship and then busted the river bank in half in a place, right?
So in that case, this would be bust in the sense of break and bank in the sense of river.
It could be that Roger busted the bank in the sense of Roger works for the Securities
and Exchange Commission. The bank was a financial institution that was being sketchy, right?
And busted the bank could also mean I ran out of money, right? So all of these things,
there are many different meanings here. And as a result of those different meanings, we
end up with very different meanings for the sentence. And it could be a piggy bank too.
That's right. I forgot about that meaning, even though I wrote these slides. Yeah, so
you could break open a bank that would be busting it as well. The fireplace was lit.
It's either a fireplace that's lighted or the best fireplace ever. We're not really
sure. But this is polysemy, the idea that words can have different senses. And this
again brings us back to word sense. We've talked about this before, but it's really
important. Many words can have multiple senses out there in the world. So let's take the
word fit. Fit is, think about at first, just think for a second, what does fit mean? Chances
are you came up with one of the senses, but maybe not all of them. So fit the package
into an overfull trunk. This is a good example of one meaning. And this is sort of the physical
placement, like I was able to find a home for this package in another area. Fit the
package into the trunk is one sense of this word. She's fit to work on your project, given
the background. This means that this particular person has the skills you need and is capable
and not just capable, but sort of, I determined that this person is acceptable to work on
the project. She's having fits about the new deadline. This means somebody's kind of
freaking out, something like that. She's quite fit for her age, could mean just physical
fitness. She can run up four flights of stairs without getting winded. That will fit nicely
into my schedule. In this case, this is a slightly different version of that first one,
right? To fit into a schedule is another case of putting something into a constrained area,
but it's metaphorical, right? It's a metaphorical extension. You're not fitting it like the
schedule doesn't have mass or anything, but it fits, right? She fits in well in San Diego.
This is one of those multi-word expression things we talked about earlier, right? To
fit in means, oh, well, this person, you know, does all the right California things. They
talk about, oh, the 405 rather than saying highway 405. That's fitting in well, I suppose.
So fit has a bunch of different senses. Fire has a bunch of different senses too. Think
about some senses of fire. What different things can fire mean? Pause, then unpause
when you're ready. So different things that fire could mean are things like direct, like
firing, like, okay, fired 10 rounds at the target. Like shooting a gun is firing, right?
You can fire somebody after 10 years, right? This is the dismiss from a job sense. They
fired the pot in the kiln. This is the pottery sense, the ceramic sense. The engine is fired,
by a steady stream of coal. This means that the engine is given power. It's given heat
in a steam engine. Firing the engine is a thing. The fire was started by lightning.
In this case, this means a physical fire, like a collection of flames. In this case,
a wildfire. The mixtape is straight fire. It means that somebody is absolutely dropping
bars. And so all of these things, fire has lots of different meanings right here. Is
it dropping bars? Spitting bars, spitting bars. Sorry, not my language. So yes, there
we go. Hit has a bunch of different senses too. I hit the dragon with an arrow. Schwaco
stock hit 500 a share. Rob loves to hit the golf course on Fridays. The mafia hit stunned
the local government. Fingerprints had three hits on old records. I hit on the dragon at
the sleazy bar. Each one of these is going to be a different meaning. In one case, physical
striking. In another case, reaching a goal. In a third, hit the links is like just to
go there and participate. Mafia hit is a murder. These kinds of hits are like a search engine
hit is returning information. To hit on is to make sexual advances. To hit up. I hit
the dragon up for gold means I'm going to request gold from the dragon. Each one of
these senses is different. So at this point, you're probably a little bit terrified because,
oh my God, all these words have different meanings. How do we handle this? How do we
deal with this? Well, remember last time we talked about the fact that some verbs don't
take an object. Um, for instance, dream, dream doesn't ever take an object. I can't say I
dreamed a pile of gold and say I dreamed about, but he can't say you dreamed it. Um, some
verbs always take an object like hit. It's very weird to say, oh, um, she hits, right?
It needs to be coerced into a situation to say something like that. And then some verbs
take to like I baked Jessica a cake, put differently. Different verbs demand different arguments.
Now here's the scarier thing. We can talk about arguments here. That's not the scary
thing. The scary thing is what I'll say after this slide. Um, an argument is an element
of the sentence which helps to complete the meaning of that sentence. It helps us to give
us more information about what that sentence means. So for instance, if we have the sentence,
will hit the dragon. I am an argument. Will is an argument. And then the dragon is an
argument as well. Um, Mary baked Sam a cake. We have Mary as an argument. Sam is an argument
and a cake is also an argument. All three of those things are arguments. Maria fired
six rounds. Maria is an argument. Six rounds are arguments. All of these things are arguments,
but what's really scary is that different verb senses can demand different arguments.
It's not just the case that different verbs like dream versus hit versus sleep can demand
different argument structure. What are we called in syntax? Subcategorization frames.
Don't worry too much about that word. You'll see it more in one 21, but different verb
senses can demand different argument structure. So let's take this example, the strike meaning
of hit. What arguments can this take? So this can take the thing doing the hitting, right?
So in this case it would probably be me. I did the hitting the thing that's being hit
in this case, the dragon and the instrument, right? So you could hit the dragon with an
arrow. You could hit it with a sword. You could hit it with a rubber chicken. It doesn't
matter. You can use something to hit, uh, to hit the dragon. Uh, but in this strike
sense you kind of need these things, right? You can say I hit the dragon and in that case
it usually just means I hit the dragon either with my fist or maybe with something else.
You know, I was driving down the street the other day and I saw a dragon and I got so
scared that I hit the dragon. That means with the car, but there's always those arguments
are around who did the hitting, what was hit and how the hitting was done. Compare
this to hit a value. In this case we have different things. We want the thing that's
hitting the goal. So in this case, Schwaco stock, we want the goal 500 a share, but there's
not really an instrument that we can use here. We couldn't say a Schwaco stock hit $500 a
share using their great new earnings report or with a brand new product release. None
of those things work. You can't use an instrument here. It just needs to be the thing hitting
the goal and the goal itself. Um, you can give other kinds of arguments like a temporal
argument like last weekend, but for the most part in terms of actual core arguments here,
these are what you've got. You can't do an instrument. Um, go to an activity like Rob
loves to hit the bowling alley with his friends. Again, this doesn't mean he's taking the bowling
ball and whacking the bowling alley repeatedly. No, that's not it. Instead. Um, this takes
different things. So the person going to the activity and that person has to be animate.
By the way, you couldn't say for instance, the rock loves to hit the bowling alley with
his friends or the bowling ball loves to hit the bowling alley. That doesn't really make
sense, right? So this needs to be an animate thing. This needs to be alive. It needs an
activity. So you can't just say Rob loves to hit with his friends. That's that doesn't
work. You need that for this sense to work and that it doesn't take an instrument. Rob
loves. So how about this? John hit the golf course with his new clubs. That kind of works.
Uh, but that's just because you know, it's like a with meaning, right? It's an instrumental.
I'm sorry. It's not an instrumental. It's a commitment. It is technically the linguistic
term you would use. It is a meaning where he has gone with the clubs separately rather
than instrumental where he is literally hitting the golf course, the turf beating the crap
out of it with a golf club. And similarly, it won't take an inanimate object. Um, the
balls love to hit the bowling alley. It doesn't work. So you need these very specific kind
of arguments. Um, so hit on has a very different set, right? Sherry hit on Steve at the party.
You usually get the person making the advances. Somebody hit on somebody else. You get the
person being hit on. You can't really use an instrument. Although I guess it's kind
of okay. I could say like, um, Sherry hit on Steve with a bad joke. Does that work right?
Or Sherry hit on Steve with a compliment. That's, I don't know. That's questionable
to me, but instruments are a little bit more difficult here. Uh, but both of these things
need to be animate, right? You wouldn't ever have the statue hit on Steve. That doesn't
work. That can't be a thing, right? So you need to have people making advances, people
being hit on. Um, and yeah, so then hit up, hit up is really fun, right? I hit up the
dragon for some gold. You need the person making the request. You can't just say something
like hit up the dragon for gold. It doesn't work. You need a request. You can't just say
I hit up the dragon. What that would actually usually mean is like I texted the dragon,
like yo dragon, what's up? That would work, but it doesn't have the same sense anymore.
It's not a request. So you need to make sure that you're saying I hit up the dragon for
gold and then you need the thing that's being requested. Uh, I'm sorry, the person you're
requesting from. So I can't just say I'll hit up for some gold like, Oh, I'm, I'm, I'm
out of gold. My party is out of gold and I need to buy a enchanted sword. I'll hit up
for some gold. It doesn't work that way. No, you need to actually hit up somebody, something
and you need to specify who that is. You could say I'll hit up someone for some gold and
that works, but that's cause we put an argument in there. We put in a placeholder. So all
of these arguments are required. And again, you can't really do an instrument here. Like
I hit up the dragon for some gold with guilt. That doesn't, and I mean guilt in the G U
I sense rather than guilt is in the gold sense. It's kind of weirdly ambiguous there. Anyways,
hit up requires all of these arguments. Um, so all of these things are difficult and you
can't, by the way, use this die transitively. Even though there are two arguments here,
you can't, or three that is, you can't say I hit up the dragon, some gold that doesn't
work. Uh, you need to say the four, you need the preposition. So this is scary. And then
we could do the same thing for fire. We could think about all of these different senses.
And in fact, I encourage you if you're kind of, if you're interested in this, try doing
this, try coming up with the required arguments for all of these things. So they fired, you
need for that version, you need the shooter basically, and you need the thing being fired.
So it could be a torpedo, could be a bullet. And usually there's a target, right? Um, it'd
be weird to just say they fired 10 rounds. Generally speaking, there's an implied target.
So usually you get all three things, but what about for this one or this just kind of, you
can play with these. These are really actually can be kind of fun. And it's a really important
part in computational linguistics, thinking about what these verb senses do and how they
work. And so we can think about every verb sense, not just every verb, because remember
there's polysemy here, but every single verb sense has a frame. Every single verb sense
has information, uh, that we kind of know instinctively as, as speakers of a language
about what arguments it should take. It has a set of arguments that it expects and those
combined together to give the overall meaning of the sentence. This is in syntax called
a subcategorization frame, generally speaking. Um, and in computational linguistics, we have
other terms, but these are lexically specific. That means every individual verb and every
individual verb sense more so has its own subcategorization frame. Very similar. I'm
sorry. Very often they will be similar to another verb's frame. It's not the case for
instance that every verb will be unique in this way, but very often, but it's not predictable.
You have to figure out which sense is workable for that verb. And this information is actually
a part of the verb's meaning, right? If you have to know this information to understand
how the verb works, think about hit up, like fundamentally the meaning of hitting up involves
somebody asking somebody else for something that's inherent to it. And so these frames
are actually a part of the meaning of those words. And so this is actually just fun, right?
And so every verb has a frame and computationally speaking, like I said, this is really useful
because if you come across a sense or a word like fired, like the company fired 20 people,
you want to know what version, what sense is being used there. Is this the employment
sense? Is this the, does the company have a large cannon that shoots employees? What,
how does this work? And so the prop bank project both has been working to basically write,
make these frames. They've been working to go through and give every verb a frame to
tell us what arguments every verb expects. And this is really, really big. This is a
huge project here and here's a list. You can click it and go through and find all of them.
And that's awesome, right? Not all of them. There are always more verbs every day. There's,
I don't think there's eat in there yet, for instance, but still you can find a list of
these frames by verb and that's awesome. And knowing this frame turns out to be really,
really, really useful for processing text. Different sets of arguments imply different
verb senses. This is called verb sense disambiguation in the computational linguistics world. And
it just helps us understand text better. If you see, okay, there's business type firing
going on. We should figure out who's doing the firing, who's being fired and where they're
being fired from. This is really useful. Think if you're trying to automatically summarize
a news article and you know, it's an article about firing in that sense, well then you
better go through and find those things. What companies firing, who are they firing and
where? Et cetera. Are they from a division? Is it from a particular sub part of the company?
Who knows? So this is really useful stuff. And similarly, if it changes senses, that
changes what you're looking for. And it lets us identify what are called semantic roles.
And this is another big question here. What are the roles of different arguments in the
sentence? What are the roles that each of these things have? Now, this is hard. Semantic
roles are really, really tough to define. Like amazingly so. Your book will give you
things like agent and source and experiencer and theme and goal and instrument. These are
perfectly reasonable roles, right? And in fact, Prop Bank gives you a different set
of them. The thing is, this gets it, and this gets it a really important question, which
is that subject is kind of bad, right? Because the subject in John fired Ivan is very different
than the subject in John fired a gun, as opposed to, for instance, John dreamed about cats.
In that case, in the dream case, John isn't really active at all. But in this case, John
is doing something strongly. And in this case, John is taking an even more direct action,
right? In this case, it might just have been John made the decision. So subject can be
very different across different verbs and across different verb senses. So we want to
be able to differentiate things, differences among subjects and objects. Again, throwing
the ball, the ball is undergoing something very different here than a fellow wrestler
would. So semantic roles are trying to get at this question of what labels are best suited
to describing all of these different roles. Should we spend hours discussing this? No.
The reason I say that is not because it's uninteresting, not because it's unimportant.
It's very important and very interesting. And in computational linguistics, oh my God,
do we think semantic roles. But for 101, probably not the best use of our time right now. We're
going to instead focus on the fact that every verb has a frame and every frame specifies
the arguments that the verb expects. And then that that knowledge is really useful for understanding
what a verb means in context. It's useful for parsing out what that verb will actually
mean in a sentence. So we've been talking about meaning in isolation this whole time.
We've been thinking about entailment. We've been thinking about connotation and denotation.
We've been thinking about prototypes. We've been thinking about all of these various relationships.
But we've been thinking about meaning sort of on its own, right? We've been thinking
about meaning independent of the world by and large. What does this verb mean everywhere?
What is always true about the relationship between up and down? What's always true about
why given sentence X? But words can mean different things in different contexts. This is really
important. Think about for a second while I drink some water, all the things that this
sentence could mean. Think about a bunch of contexts where you could see this sentence.
So just to throw a couple off the top of my head, I mean, one would be, can you see? Like
literally, like, okay, uh, you know, I've just taken off the bandages. Can you see?
Oh my God. Yes. Or maybe somebody sits down in front of you at a movie theater with a
tall hat and you ask, Oh, can you, can you see? Um, that's useful to know. Um, can you
see on a zoom call can be useful, right? Like, can you see everybody? Um, that's helpful.
How about I'm open? I'm open again, has many different meanings depending on context. Part
of this is sense, different senses of the word, but part of it is just different contexts,
right? So I'm open could mean in a sport like, Hey, throw the ball to me. I'm open. No one's
bothering me at the moment over here. Um, because they know I can't catch. Um, I can
catch frisbees. That's what, anyways, I digress. Um, I'm open means I throw the ball to me
or it could mean, uh, I'm open. Come on by. I have time for you to, you know, for me to
repair your car or something like that. It could mean, what do you want for dinner? Oh,
you know, Mexican Chinese. Do you have a feeling I'm open? I could go either way. So I'm open
could mean that as well. How about take that? Take that could mean many things like, Oh,
um, you know, I put a textbook on the table. Why don't you take that? There you go. Take
that means literally grab the thing over there. Take that could mean, you know, you insulted
my dignity. Take that. And then you whack them over the head with a rubber chicken.
Um, it can mean all kinds of things. I feel you could mean I emotionally feel what you're
saying here. It could mean we're both in a dark room and I'm trying to find where you
are and I've just grabbed something and it is a leg. Oh, I feel you. Great. Okay. Excellent.
All of these things have different meanings in different contexts. This is pragmatics.
When meaning stops being about words and sentences and starts being about situations, we are
in the land of pragmatics. So pragmatics is the study of meaning in a specific discourse
context that is in this place that the meaning is being used basically in the area of the
world that the meaning has come up. That's pragmatics. So semantics is very abstract.
The semantic meaning of a word does not depend in any particular way on the context of it.
That is just what that word always means. The meaning of fast will never turn into slow
in a conversation. Um, we'll talk sarcasm later, but an entailment is true in every
universe. Pragmatics is contextual. It considers the current conversation. It considers what's
around us, right? It considers what you and I had been saying yesterday. It considers
what we've been saying 20 minutes ago. Um, it assumes things about the current world.
It knows that for instance, there's a mug on the table right there. Um, those are all
pragmatic things and it uses elements of our situation to fill in blanks about meaning.
So everything in pragmatics flows from this idea of discourse of conversation and linguistic
interaction. This can be a conversation verbally back and forth. It can be a text message conversation.
It can be the greater discourse in either a classroom or a, like a discord channel,
right? You'll have a greater discourse there and everything will have its own meaning,
but it'll have its own meaning within the context of that discourse. Right? And so we
have these conversations in our world with goals in mind, generally speaking, um, they
can be social goals. Like there were conversations I'll have with people that exist for no reason
except to, you know, be social, right? If you are standing next to somebody in an elevator,
you're going to have a conversation with them. Is it like crucial? Are you trying to get
information for them? No. But if it's a colleague that you know, well, Hey, how was your weekend?
Do I care? I mean, sometimes usually a little bit, but how was your weekend? Oh, wow. Sure
is boring weather outside San Diego, right? But these can be a social goal. It can be
a practical goal. You have sandwiches. I want sandwiches. Hey, let's, let's negotiate
in such a way that a sandwich ends up in my stomach and money ends up in your cash register.
This is a very practical goal. Or, you know, you walk into the library and you, you're
trying to figure out, Hey, um, can you help me find a copy of this particular book? And
so the librarian would help you with that or an informational goal. Like for instance,
I might ask my wife, you know, Hey honey, are you working tomorrow here? There's not
going to be anything accomplished by this except for me to gain more information. She
might say, yeah, I'm working tomorrow from 10 to 10, 10 to six or something like that.
That would give me useful information. And so we are assuming during these cooperations
that whatever the goal is that we share that goal. And more importantly, we're assuming
that we're going to cooperate and that's not universally true, but it's true more often
than not. And as a result, we end up with the cooperative principle. And there's no
one specific statement of this, but a good summary of it would be something like, I'm
going to try to act in such a way as to help the exchange of information or just of life
generally rather than to hinder it. I am going to try to help you conduct this conversation
in a way that it meets both of our goals. This is huge. We don't even think about it,
but it's kind of a pretty universal thing in human language. It's very weird when the
cooperative principle is not being followed. And so this isn't a rule in the sense of a
grammatical rule in grammatical rules and specifically descriptive grammatical rules,
like sentences always have verbs. If you don't have a verb, it is a busted sentence in English.
But this is true more in the sense of it is a guiding principle that is almost always
followed. So we can break this down, the cooperative principle generally a little bit
further. We can break it into four maxims developed by H. Paul Grice. And so these are
referred to as the Gricean maxims. And these are huge. These are a really important part
of understanding pragmatics. First of the maxims is tell the truth and give accurate
information. That's all. This is a way that you can cooperate with somebody else in a
conversation. They walk up to you and they ask you a question, give them an accurate answer,
tell them the truth. And so don't say things that you believe to be false and don't say things that
you don't actually know or that you don't have evidence to believe are true. So it would be a
really bad thing if somebody walks up to you and he says, you know, oh, hey, did you see a fox run
by here? And I didn't, I have no idea what you're talking about. And I say, yeah, I went that way.
That'd be, that'd be nasty, right? It'd be dumb. You wouldn't do that because I don't actually
know. I didn't actually happen. So that's false. And I'm giving information I don't actually have.
So that's the maxim of quality. Tell the truth, give accurate information.
The maxim of quantity says, give enough information, but not too much information.
This is important. Be as informative as is required, but not more so. So it has bounds
on both ends. This is the difference. And it needs to be bound on both ends because
both sides are just as dumb. If somebody says, uh, Hey, Will, have you seen Mark? Uh, and I say,
yes, that's a dick move, right? That's not something you would want to do generally
because generally speaking, people, when they ask you a question like that, they want details.
If you know, you should tell them. So technically you answered their question, but you didn't really,
you didn't get at the main force of it, but it would be just as bad to say something along the
lines of, yes, I've seen Mark 362 times in my lifetime. Uh, the first time was in my office, uh,
or was in his office when I came to visit, et cetera, that wouldn't be wise. You don't want to
be too informative, but you also want to be informative enough. And so it is just as cooperative
to give too much or just as uncooperative that is to give too much information as it would be to
give too little. The maximum of relation is saying, give relevant information and only relevant
information in a conversation. There were an endless number of things. I mean, remember,
we have an unlimited number of sentences to choose from. We can always create a new sentence,
but the sentence that we're actually going to produce is going to be dictated in part by the
relevance to the conversation. Right? Um, and so your responses should have something to do
with the matter under discussion. So the maximum of rel relation or relevance, I'll say both and
people understand both, but the maximum of relevance is just saying, talk about the thing
we're talking about. You know, don't go off on some crazy tangent that has no, nothing to do
with anything. Right. And then there's the maximum of manner be as clear as you can possibly be.
So this has a bunch of different, uh, kind of consequences. One is don't be obscure.
So don't use big words when little words would suffice, especially when they would just confuse
things. Similarly, don't just manner wise, like avoid ambiguity. You don't want to sit there and
give a bunch of lexically and syntactically ambiguous sentences, ambiguous, ambiguous.
There's the prosody ambiguous sentences because that's uncooperative. That's dumb. And also,
uh, wordiness, if you are too wordy. And by the way, I want to draw one big distinction here.
This is something that trips a lot of folks up. So we've talked about the maximum of relevance.
I'm sorry. We've talked about the maximum of quantity, which says don't give too much
information that is different from the maximum manner. This says don't use too many words.
If somebody is giving way too much information, but using the proper number of words to give it,
that's a, uh, that's a, uh, quantity violation. But if somebody is not giving new information,
but using a lot of words to do so, that would be manner. So a difference for instance,
would be, um, the maximum of, um, a relevance violation would be, have you seen Mark?
Uh, I'm sorry, a quantity violation would be, have you seen Mark? Uh, no, I have not seen Mark
since May 5th, uh, when we bumped into each other at the grocery store or something like that. Uh,
that would be an unnecessary amount of information. An unnecessary wordiness answer could
be absolutely positively. No, I have not seen Mark in any of the slightest of ways. And in fact,
if I even had seen Mark, I would probably be telling you, but I haven't seen Mark really at
all. I can't think of even a scenario in which I would have seen Mark since I last saw Mark.
So in general, no, Mark hasn't been seen by me there. I said a whole bunch of stuff, but not a
damn bit of information beyond no. Right. And so manner is giving a lot of words without a lot of
information. Whereas quantity is giving a lot of information, but in as many words as you'd like,
right? So this is really important. And then organizing your thoughts is crucial too. As a
teacher, this is the hard part, right? Um, organizing, I can talk to you all day long
about things in this, in this subject, but I need to have my thoughts reasonably organized as I'm
teaching or else it's going to be very hard for you to follow. One other thing with manner is that
there is also, um, just physical manner violations, right? So if I were to talk to you like this,
if I said this, and you can barely understand anything that I'm saying, it's probably better
because I got a microphone right here, but still, or whispering, if I were to whisper in public,
that would be yet another way that I could violate manner, or I respond in a language you
don't speak. All of those things are possible maximum manner violations. So let's think about
this for a second. Imagine that your roommate, Alex arrives home, asks where your other roommate,
Chris is. You're not sure where Chris is, but you know, he left earlier. So let's think for a
second. I want you to think at home about a way to violate the maximum quality. So come up with
a statement you could make to your roommate, Alex explaining, uh, where Chris went, violating the
maximum quality. So when you're ready, one really good way to violate quality is, I don't know where
Chris is, but I could just say, oh, he's at the park. There, I'm lying. I'm giving inaccurate
information. Or more importantly, I'm saying things that I don't exactly know. I'm portraying this
guess, basically, this conjecture as truth. Or I could just say, oh, he's right behind me. Don't
you see him? Again, that's both gaslighting and violating the maximum quality, right? So in this
case, I'm saying things that I know and believe to be false, or I'm saying things that I know,
I'm sorry, that I'm not sure are true. I could say, oh, you know, Chris ran off to join the Marines.
Maybe he did, but I don't know that. So those would be violations of quality. Violations. Cool.
Speech is really hard, remember? Quantity. How would I violate quantity with this? So think to
yourself, what would a quantity violation look like for this situation? Chris is not here. You
don't know where he is, but you know he left earlier. Think about it. So a good quantity
violation would be to give not enough information. So you could say something like, where's Chris?
Technically, you're not lying. You don't actually know where Chris is at the moment,
but they probably want more information as to he's not here, right? So that's not quite
informative enough. Or I could be super informative. I could say he left at 2.57 PM
and 38 seconds, and I saw him heading east northeast last time he moved. That would be
really uncooperative, right? To give that much information. So either of those could
be a quantity violation. How about relation? Where's Chris? Go.
Where's Chris? I really like Breath of the Wild. That was probably my very favorite Zelda game,
and I never expected I was going to say that, but I think it's a little bit better than Ocarina of
Time and Link to the Past, although it's very different. I happen to believe that. Fight me.
But nonetheless, don't please. I'd lose. But the maxim of relation is relevance information,
and there is no part of that discussion about Chris's location that involves the Breath of
the Wild, right? Great game, but has nothing to do with Chris. And so a response that violates
relevance is completely off topic. There is no relation to what's actually being discussed here.
And then maxim of manner. Be as clear as I can be. So in this case, if I know that my roommate
doesn't speak Spanish and I say, no se, right there, that's not a good manner, right? Or I
could say something like, you know, Chris may or may not have left, although I'm not sure. Maybe
he did leave. I don't know. I think, yeah, actually he did leave. Right there. That was really ugly,
right? Because you kept going back and forth. Does he know? Does he not know? And then at the end,
like, and quietly, yeah, he left. Or something like that. Or again, he is absolutely, positively,
100% not here. Again, a little bit manner violation. Sometimes you can do this for style,
right? But yeah, so manner violations would look something like that. Now, this is big,
right? I mean, this is big, partly just to understand it's an interesting part of language.
We all do these things. We all follow these maxims, and we never even think about it. And
they're pretty damn universal, by the way. I mean, this is kind of a fact of conversation,
right? I mean, they're going to be implemented a little bit differently, and they're going to
be different sensations of, you know, that's too much, that's too little, culturally. But by and
large, there's something approximating all of these across human language. But these affect
meaning is the other reason we're bringing it up. It's not just useful to know about language,
but these change meaning. So if I give you this sentence, John was alone in the room,
or so he believed. How is that different? So the weird part about this is that last bit,
or so he believed. If that bit wasn't on there, you would assume that John was alone in the room.
But with that on there, you're thinking that he wasn't alone in the room.
Why is that? Why does adding this on here make us think he wasn't alone?
Because the maxim of relevance. John might be sitting in the room, right? And John might
believe that he is alone in the room. That could be completely and totally true. Right now, I
believe I am alone in this room. And in fact, I have pretty good evidence that, yeah, no one's
behind my green screen. I'm alone in this room. Great. And so I believe it. But if you say this,
you're kind of making the claim that he's not actually alone in this room. This has an
implication, saying it that way. Similarly, Carl, who is absolutely not a lizard person,
went to the store. What do you think about Carl? He's a lizard person. Yep. That's what this means.
If you add this in there, maxim of relevance says, wait a second, hold on. This, why would you have
even brought this up if he wasn't a lizard person? Yeah, that's weird. Marvin left at 544 and 30
seconds. If somebody says this to you in good faith, what are you assuming?
You would probably assume that this is like some variety of a game like, you know, oh,
everybody leaves the room on a scavenger hunt. And then we're so in this case,
you're precisely timing this for a specific reason. Or maybe the person is giving an
electronic key card log to a police investigation where those 30 seconds really are relevant.
Frankly, even 544 is a little weird, right? If somebody said, you know,
hey, is Chris here? I said, no, he left at 543. They're going to kind of look at me like,
did you really just give me that much precision? Okay, sure. And usually say like, oh, he left 545
or so, left 15 minutes ago, something like that. So this has an implication. If you have that there,
did Ramchand ever work with Sam? He hates dogs. What does this mean?
There are two possible meanings. Well, actually there are many possible meanings for this,
but we're going to go on ahead and assume because we're human, that this response has something to
do with this question. So we're going to read it as such. I'm going to read this as, did Ramchand
ever work with Sam? He hates dogs. So maybe Sam is blind and has a seeing eye dog. And so Ramchand
wouldn't want to work with Sam because he's afraid of the seeing eye dog. Or maybe Sam is a
dog. That's a possibility too. And this was a, you know, school for guide animals and Ramchand
only works with horses. I don't know. I think there are guide horses. Either way, it's a thing.
So in this case, we read this very differently, given that that is the response. Did Sarah buy
chicken? I think so. What does this now mean? The fact that I said, I think so actually
demonstrates uncertainty, right? I mean, that sounds really dumb. That's the way I phrased it,
but we understand that if I say, I think so, I don't have any evidence strongly in either
direction. I might say, I think so because Sarah, you know, usually buys chicken or, you know, oh,
I looked at the receipt and I think she bought chicken, but I'm not sure. But this carries a
strong implication that I am not sure because of the Gricean maxims, because we assume people
follow them all the time. And when we assume this, it allows us to get a lot more done,
right? There's less confirmation. There's less clarification. So for instance, if somebody says,
if I walk up to somebody and I say, you know, hey, will you sell me a bottle of water? And they
say that's $3.50 and I stop and I say, wait, will you sell me a bottle of water though? I don't want
to talk price yet. Will you do it? That's dumb, right? The fact that they said it's $3.50, which,
God, that's a lot of money for a bottle of water. Anyways, the fact that they said that to me
indicates that, yes, I'm willing to sell it to you. Here is the price. The maxim of relevance
gets that done. It makes things much more efficient as well, which is good. I love this sign so very,
very much. My wife and my uncle-in-law and we were walking down at Balboa Park one time,
some time back, and we happened upon this sign outside of a restaurant for, and this was the
only sign out there. This is the only information and there's nothing else of use cut off on this
side here. So this chunk right here, America's best restaurants, gourmet magazine. What does
this mean? So what do you interpret this as meaning? Probably something like, this is one
of America's best restaurants, right? Or this was listed in an article in gourmet magazine titled
America's best restaurants. But that's not what it says. Literally all this says is a quote,
America's best restaurants from gourmet magazine. This quote actually could have said,
America's best restaurants are many and numerous, but not one of them is Prado at Balboa Park.
Or, you know, Prado is absolutely not one of America's best restaurants. That quote would
still be accurate. But the fact that they put it there means that they want us to draw the
implicature that they are one of America's best restaurants. They didn't say we are one of
America's best restaurants. They didn't do any of that. In fact, we have no detail as to why this
was written aside from just the knowledge that they're probably trying to convince us this is a
great restaurant, right? So this depends entirely on implicature here. We're assuming this is
relevant. It would be weird if this showed up outside a dry cleaner, right? We're assuming
this is relevant because this is a restaurant, right? We're assuming that this is true, that
they wouldn't just print this if this were false. We're assuming that they're giving us a proper
amount of information. We're assuming that quantity is good here because if this said
not America's best restaurants, that would change the meaning entirely. So we're assuming that
they're giving us enough information here. And we're assuming that this is clear. We're assuming
that they're telling us this in a manner that is not deceptive. That's and, you know, is it clear?
Not really. But through implicature, we're able to figure out exactly what they mean here.
So this is really common. Gricey and Maxon's are leveraged all the damn time. And when we don't,
it's problematic. So if we had, for instance, my wife and I are talking and she says,
what did you get at the store? I reply, ice cream, tootsie rolls, a big squishy tofurkey,
and a receipt. What's wrong there? What, Maxim, have I violated?
The receipt. Everyone gets a receipt. Well, okay. Historically, everyone's gotten receipts. Hopefully
less so in the future, right? Save the receipt trees. But nonetheless, and a receipt, this implies
this doesn't need to be said. That's going to be a quantity violation.
Did you really get a big squishy tofurkey? Maybe. I don't think so. Okay. Now we're seeing a quality
violation up top here. And this itself is kind of quality-ish, right? Because maybe and I don't
think so mean different things. So this doesn't really track. Wait, did you or didn't you?
They didn't have any Kobe beef. This is asking for an answer. This is irrelevant. So we have
a relevance violation here. What does that have to do with it? Absolutely, positively, completely,
and totally nothing at all. That is a manner violation. There are too many words for too
little information. She says it's divorce time and the screenplay is over. So this is the kind
of thing that you end up with when you don't follow the Maxim's. And in fact, you're going
to not follow the Maxim's in one of your homeworks. And it's going to be amazing because you're going
to troll your family, friends, and fellow members of your discord servers. However you want to roll,
it's going to be awesome. So this leads us to the next question here, which is what was I doing?
Well, as you probably realize, I was violating a Maxim. That's why it says that top of the slide.
When you are actually being uncooperative by failing to follow these guidelines, you are
violating a Maxim. When you are breaking down conversation, you are violating a Maxim. When it
is causing pain, you violate a Maxim. You are actually messing up a conversation. Just like in
that last example, that was screwing up that conversation completely. That could have gone
super smoothly, but because I was being non-Christian, everything broke down and I got a
divorce. I didn't actually. Yay! But still, this violated the conversation's entire flow. It was
bad. Violating Maxim's, that is, breaks conversations. And you will violate these for
homework and it's going to be awesome. This is a video that if I click it, YouTube is going to
copyright strike this. But this is an example of Macho Man Randy Savage violating every Maxim
just ever. And so I highly encourage you look at the slides and you click this because it's amazing.
You get all of them. It's absolutely great. So this is Maxim violation in action and I really
wish I could click this link, but that's the nature of online teaching, right? And then flouting
a Maxim. Flouting a Maxim is intentionally violating a Maxim in a way that the listener can
detect in order to express a specific meaning. Here's the big difference. When you violate a
Maxim, you break conversation because people don't understand what's going on. When you flout a Maxim,
you're also violating the Maxim, but you're doing it in a way that's clear to people. You're doing
it in a way that is obvious and that itself carries meaning. Violating Maxims breaks down
meaning. It breaks down conversations. Flouting them uses these Maxims to express meaning. It
carries meaning and this can have great comedic effect. And unless you completely do this and
it's undetected, the conversation isn't messed up at all. So examples of this could be sarcasm.
If I say to somebody, if they say, you know, what do you think about Taco Bell? I say, oh yes,
Taco Bell, it's truly gourmet cuisine. I think most people would agree that Taco Bell is many
things, but truly gourmet cuisine is not among them, right? So it is not gourmet and therefore
saying this, I am flouting the Maxim of quality. I am lying to you outright, but I'm doing it in a
way that is very apparent, right? If I said, you know, that about the Prado and it truly wasn't,
then that would be probably violating the Maxim. But in this case, I'm flouting it by saying truly
gourmet cuisine. Um, you're going to understand that I'm flouting it here. How about, um, very
often students will ask me, is this going to be on the test? And my token response is, that's a
good question. So what have I done there? I have provided insufficient information. I've told them
it's a good question, but I haven't given them the information they want, but I've made it very
clear to them that I heard them. I understand exactly what's being said, but I'm not going to
give them that information. I am violating the heck out of quantity here, but I'm doing so to
express a meaning. Namely, I'm not going to tell you whether that's on the test. How does my hair
look? Somebody walks up to you and says, how does my hair look? And you say, hmm, we, uh, haven't
been to a cat show in a while. What does that mean? Generally, you don't love the hair, right? Um, and
that's not a great approach. Um, but this is a very conscious way of saying, I don't really care
for it, but I don't want to say it. It carries that meaning in conversation to violate relevance
in that case. Should I build syntax trees or work on phonology problems for the exam? Yes.
I have given you insufficient information. You gave me a question that demanded X or Y,
and I gave you an answer that equates to both. That's not actually giving you enough information,
but by not giving you enough information, you get good information, right? And there are lots
of other examples you can think about of flouting these maxims. And we do it actually pretty
regularly in daily life, right? Um, but the thing is, uh, these maxims are omnipresent in our world
and they turn out to be really, really important as we think about other elements of pragmatics
and frankly of conversation generally. So to wrap up for today, words do have relationships to one
another. Words expect certain arguments and those arguments depend on the word sense being used.
We're assuming all the time that people are cooperative in conversations and the Gricean
maxims describe what that cooperation usually looks like. And they can be violated, breaking
down the conversation or flouted to advance the conversation by specifically violating them here,
uh, for a specific meaning. So there we go. Next time, we're going to talk about some of
the other elements in pragmatics. And so bring some more meaning in context. Thank you all very,
very much and have a great day.
