Okay, hi everybody. Today we're going to talk a little bit about pragmatics and we're also going to get into some of the intersections within
linguistics that we've left behind. But first a quick note on metaphorical extension.
We've talked about this a little bit already in the class, but metaphorical extension is when a
concept or a word is kind of applied a little bit further outside of its domain.
So think about fitting objects into a trunk. You can fit them into your schedule, right?
It's not anymore a spatial process. You're no longer literally placing objects,
but you're pushing something into a packed area, right?
And so this is another example of this. Deep-frying in the U.S.
is where you put some kind of a food item, usually in some kind of breading, and you dip it into oil and you burn
the heck out of it. And so deep-frying is
applied now actually to memes, where you get incredibly large amounts of, you know,
image processing artifacts, you get weird coloration, etc.
So this is kind of a cool extension of the word deep-fried, and a cool example of that in action generally.
So today, pragmatics. Language in context. Last time we started off talking about the cooperative principle, right?
The idea that if people are acting cooperatively, if people are trying to work together and not defect, so to speak,
we are able to skip a bunch of pain. We're able to be more efficient.
We're able to assume more things about conversation. We talked about the maxims that help us define that. Today
we're going to talk a little bit more about some of the things that grow out of those maxims, that grow out of that
cooperation, and allow us to do pragmatics, right? And so the maxims we talked about last time, just to review, are quality.
Namely, say the things that are accurate. Say things you know to be true, and don't say things you don't know to be true.
Quantity, give the right amount of information. Not too much, not too little.
Relevance, or relation, is talk about things that are relevant to the conversation. And manner
gets into the manner by which you say things. Use words that are clear. Speak in such a way that you're being clear.
Manner covers that. So today's plan is to talk about implicature in conversation, to talk about speech acts,
Dykesis, and then finally to address some of the other things we're leaving behind. So conversational implicature is
what is suggested, but not expressed or entailed by an utterance.
So by expressed, I mean something like, if I say, this puppy is cute.
I am making a very strong expression that the puppy is cute.
And in fact, that the puppy is cute is entailed by that utterance as well. But expression is direct.
It is overt. You are saying exactly that thing. As opposed to implicature, which is covert.
It's something that we understand to be true, and we guess is probably true, but it's not necessarily said directly.
So as a listener, when you hear a statement that has a strong implicature, that you can draw that implicature from it.
I'm sorry. It's not so fair to say that the statement has an implicature. You as a listener draw an implicature from a statement.
But there are many statements that have very obvious implicatures to be drawn.
So, um, for instance, let's think about this versus entailment.
If I give you the sentence, Mary finally bought a hard drive to back up her computer,
what kind of things does this entail? Pause for a second, think about it, then come back.
So what this would entail for most people
would be things like Mary now owns a hard drive.
If she bought a hard drive, that means she now owns one. Or even more simply, Mary has a hard drive. That works.
For instance, there was a time period where Mary didn't have a hard drive. Finally, pretty strongly, I mean, that's a thing, right?
Or perhaps, although actually, hold on, I have to bust my own
entailment there, it could be the case that she had other hard drives,
but they weren't to back up her computer. So that would actually have to be an implicature.
But other things that could work is that hard drives can back up your computer, or
Mary is able to purchase things.
You know, those are the kinds of boring things that you get out of entailment, right?
Entailed sentences don't tend to give us much new information, by definition, right?
We can think, though, about the implicatures of this sentence. What does this imply?
So one of the big ones is that Mary didn't have one before.
It'd be a little bit weird to say something like this if she already had a hard drive to back up her computer, right?
And in fact, you would flaunt the maxim. If, for instance, Mary, like myself, is kind of obsessed with backups and has
five different hard drives with copies of her machine, saying,
oh, wow, Will finally bought a hard drive to back up his computer, is a good way to make fun of me, right, for being a
little bit obsessed in that particular way.
So, um, but saying it like this carries the implicature that Mary didn't have one before.
It also carries the implicature that she needed one for a long time, that she's had this computer for six months already and hasn't backed
it up. And so this carries that as well. It implies that her computer wasn't backed up before.
Again, this isn't strong. You can very easily find ways to cancel this, but it's there. It implies that she owns a computer.
It's not, strictly speaking, it's not an entailment, because it could be actually that it's her aunt's computer.
Mary is using it, or maybe it's her employer's computer that she's backing up, but still,
we don't know this for sure, but it's a pretty strong implication there. And it doesn't imply a bunch of things, right?
It doesn't imply that she's Icelandic. In fact, the country of Iceland, there are no reasonable Icelandic implicatures to be drawn from this.
That wouldn't be sane.
There is a set of things that we can draw, of
implicatures that we can pretty safely draw from sentences, and then every other statement about the world is in the set that we really can't,
right? It doesn't imply that she owns a Mac in any way, shape, or form. There's nothing here that is Mac-ish.
She went to Costco for the hard drive is not implied by this. It's a good idea, by the way.
They will take back hard drives that they break and just give you new ones, or that are, that die.
Anyways, I digress. Still, that doesn't give you that, and it doesn't imply every other statement in the world, right?
There are a lot of things that are not implied by sentences,
but there is this set still of things that are very reasonable implicatures for a listener to draw.
So, implicature is sort of a very different world,
but it has a very similar feeling to entailment for most people in their daily life.
The difference being that, unlike entailments, implicatures don't need to be true in every situation.
Both implicature and entailment are pieces of information that you can get from a sentence, from an utterance, but
entailments are true always.
Implicatures are only true in certain situations, or are probably true, but not necessarily true.
So, um, we can think about all of these things and bust each one of these, and in fact, we already did earlier before.
I mean, maybe she didn't need one for a long time.
Maybe she just got her computer yesterday, and you're being sarcastic, or maybe she just got her computer yesterday,
and you have really high standards for unbacked up data.
Again, we can get into all of these various reasons why these things might not be true. They might not be true,
but still, these are useful.
We do them, and the reason that we do them, and the reason that we're able to do them, is because of the cooperative principle.
The cooperative principle is, again, the thing underlying our maxims.
We can draw implicatures because we think people are cooperating, and because, by and large, they are, right?
We're trying to find a way that the other person's phrasing, that the other person's words, is in accordance with the Gricean maxims.
So, if we look at some sampling implicatures, for instance, Robert and Jisung sure have been hanging out a lot.
What does this mean? What does this imply?
For most people, this would mean,
I think there's something more here than just a friendship, or maybe they were previously enemies,
but now they're hanging out a lot, but it implies that there's something notable about their relationship.
Usually, I think these people are secretly falling for each other, or something like that.
It would be very strange, for instance, and a way to think about this is, it would be very, very strange to say this about,
for instance, if Robert and Jisung are brother and sister. It would be very weird to say that, right?
It would seem like you're implying something very unusual there, and so you would probably not use that sentence there.
This has the implicature that there's something romantic going on here, or that there's something otherwise notable.
Maybe if you're trying, maybe there's a conspiracy afoot. You're like, well, I don't know who's,
who the, the imposter is. Maybe, maybe Robert and, I mean, Robert and Jisung sure have been hanging out a lot.
I mean, you could go that route, but this says there's something notable about that fact. You're interested in Ron?
He cheated on his last girlfriend. What does this imply? What are the implicatures of this statement?
The big one for most people is that if he cheated on his last girlfriend,
he will cheat on you as well. That Ron is going to be a bad match for you precisely because
this is a problem for Ron.
So you say this, and the reason you bring up this cheated on his last girlfriend is because you feel it's relevant to the situation.
This is a maximum of relevance issue. For instance, you're interested in Ron.
He eats s'mores
when camping. That wouldn't make any sense, unless that were some kind of a disclaimer here.
So you wouldn't say this unless it were some kind of a problem for you to work with.
If you've got somebody up on the stand,
for instance, if you're a lawyer, you're cross-examining somebody, you might say something,
I don't know if you would say this, but you see this stuff in movies, like, was this before or after your conviction for armed robbery?
What does this imply?
Well, very strongly, this would imply for a jury that this person is not trustworthy.
This implies that this person is a criminal, right?
And so it might taint their testimony in the eyes of a jury, or something along those lines.
And then if you walk up to somebody and you say, hmm, lots of folks wear deodorant. What does that generally imply?
That implies that you smell funny. You, too, should consider deodorant. Deodorant might be right for you.
But either way, saying this has a strong implicature that you don't, and that's a problem.
For, because of the maxim of relevance. And in fact, all of these things are relevance sort of situations.
So, um, that's useful. But there are implicatures that you can draw based on other maxims, right?
So if I say, Robert might have eaten the cookie.
This implies,
what this gets at here, fundamentally, is that I'm not sure. This implies very strongly that Robert
might have eaten the cookie, but that I'm not sure. Because if the maxims are true,
and I know that Robert ate the cookie,
I would just say Robert ate the cookie. Or if I know he didn't, I'd just say Robert didn't.
But this carries the implication that I'm unsure that Robert ate the cookie or not.
This would be a quality violation if I know about that. If we have the sentence,
Bub ate some of the cat treats, this implies that Bub didn't eat all of the cat treats, right?
This is by virtue of what's called scalar implicature.
If you say, I ate some of X, that implies that you didn't eat all of them.
And so if this is the case, if Bub did eat all of the cat treats, this would be a quantity violation.
This would be a violation of the maximum quantity. Again,
we use this example, which is one of my very favorites. John, who is 100% not a lizard person, is coming to dinner.
The fact that most people would hear this and go, wow,
I didn't know John was a lizard person, or is he a lizard person, is entirely a relevance thing.
Because he wouldn't have mentioned it otherwise. It's like I've seen, you know, t-shirts that say,
I'm not a, and then some, you know, thing that people consider deplorable, and then on the back side,
it said, stop asking, it's right on the t-shirt. And just kind of getting at this idea of relevance,
that you wouldn't bring it up if it weren't possibly true, right?
The lady doth protest too much is a nice example of a relevance violation.
If somebody, you know, if my wife walks into my, into the kitchen, and I immediately turn to her and say, I didn't eat your cookie,
she's going to
pretty heavily assume that I ate her cookie, right? Because otherwise, that would be a relevance violation,
that wouldn't make any sense otherwise. And then, who do you think stole the cookie? I heard Robert was in town.
This is a cool one, right? The immediate implication from that is, I think Robert stole your cookie.
Um, but this implies that we have reason to believe that. And again, if not, this would be a relevance violation.
Because Robert's being in town is completely irrelevant, if it has nothing to do, I mean,
unless there's some relation to the cookie, it would be a relevance issue.
Or similarly, if somebody says, you know, hey, did you write this note? And I said, no, no quiero responder a esta pregunta.
What this means, generally speaking, is that I don't speak any English.
So, if somebody just walks up to me, and they see a note, and I'm standing next to it,
and they say, hey, did you write this note? And I respond to them in Spanish, that carries the implicature that I don't speak English.
Otherwise, it would be a manner violation. I heard them speak English to me, and
they asked me for information, and I gave it to them in Spanish. That would be a manner violation,
unless I don't actually speak English, right? I mean, by the way, this can be very easily used and weaponized, right? If you,
if somebody walks up to you with a clipboard on campus,
the very best way to do that is just to start respond to them in a different language, and, and they assume,
oh, they must not speak English, they're not worth my time.
Anyways, there are lots of techniques for dodging people with clipboards, but that's a really good one. As are strongly accented, no English,
sorry, statements. Works well, too. Although, that's a quality violation, more so.
Um, because I, I do actually have English. So, anyways, as you probably noticed at some point in time during this quarter,
so, other implications are out there all the time. We can think of sentences that carry implications
everywhere. It is constant.
So,
implicature turns out to be really important in language, because it is everywhere, and it can be intentional or unintentional.
We've probably all been in a situation where we say something, and it carries exactly the wrong implicature, right?
Um, for instance, I'll give you an example of this. Recently, the folks in the linguistics department,
we put together a statement that was just
directly against sexual harassment and that kind of thing. Just saying, we do not support all of this misconduct that's, you know, come out lately.
Um, with,
with regards to the MeToo movement and otherwise,
we just wanted to put on the record that that does not fly in our department.
And it's absolutely 100% true. And somebody said, oh, we should put this at the top of our department website. And then somebody
brought up the fact that, wait a second, hold on, we do implicature here.
That might not be great, because we haven't had any scandals. This wasn't brought about on the basis of some
major issue here.
Instead, what this is for is just sort of general purpose.
But if I were to write that, if I were to put at the very top of our website,
hey, we don't participate in sexual harassment,
that carries an implicature that we did before, right? And that's not true. That's not accurate.
So we don't want to do that. We want to be careful about that.
So unintentional implicature is definitely a thing, and it can cause trouble. Um, you can get deceptive implicatures as well.
This is a really good way to lie to somebody, is to use implicatures. That way you're not actually violating quality.
You're not actually lying. You're just being,
you're just using implicatures that are a little bit tricky, right? So a deceptive implicature would be something like this.
I saw at a grocery store something like, Herman's rice is gluten-free.
What's the implicature here?
The big one is that everybody else's rice is not.
When in reality, all rice is gluten-free. People, come on! Saying my rice is gluten-free is a
really stupid
quantity violation, right? That's, that's saying the obvious. Rice is gluten-free.
But they're using this to try and position their product
for the people who are scared of gluten for some reason now. And by the way,
I'm not making light of people who actually have gluten issues, right?
That's a thing.
But it became a fad recently that you should go non-gluten for some reason, and as a result,
this is trying to appeal to those people by abusing the maxim, right?
Um, it implies that all other rice isn't. Promise me that you didn't eat my cookie. We've been friends for ten years!
You didn't actually say you didn't eat the cookie, right?
But this carries the implication that, of course, if we're friends, I wouldn't eat your cookie, and we've been friends for so long.
Um, what did you do last night? I went out for a ginger ale with my hamster, then got stuck in traffic before heading home.
This carries the implication that after you got home, that's the end of it, right?
The maxim of quantity tells us that there's nothing else there. You wouldn't add, you know,
this implies that you wouldn't say, oh, and then after I got home, I went out and I robbed three banks.
That's a different thing. Um, so the cooperative principle is implying
cooperation, and so if you're not cooperating, well, all bets are off, right? It doesn't always apply.
So, uh, this is something that interrogators, I actually had an interrogator in my 101 class at one point in time,
and it was great, because we got to talk all about implicature, right? Because it's a common thing in that world.
And so, uh, this does not always apply,
but it's really interesting to think about it when it doesn't, seeing dancing back and forth across the maxims.
Um, so implicature is a really important part of pragmatics,
and it stems from that cooperative principle, as well as from the conversational context. If there's reason to believe that we're not
being honest with each other, that these won't be followed, then things get very different, very interesting, right?
But there are other elements of conversation that can come from the context as well.
One of those is the idea of a speech act, or performative speech. These mean roughly the same thing.
Sometimes a statement means more than just a statement. Most speech out there is something that's declarative, saying,
hey, that cat is cute. Or interrogative,
what are you having for dinner? Or it serves to expand the discourse in some way. It serves to move forward our interactions, right?
Something like, hey, could you close the door? Or just close the door. Those things are,
yeah, these are very basic kinds of sentences. You're asking questions, you're making statements,
you're just interacting with a person, right?
But there are cases where speech itself is taking an action. By saying something,
you are doing real work in the world. And this is a speech act.
Um, these are sentences that accomplish an action by virtue of having been uttered. When you say something,
something happens in the world. So an example of this would be something like, I declare you to be married.
When a person with the proper authority says that about people who intend to be married, at that moment,
marriage has occurred. At least, you know, there are many traditions. Marriage is cultural.
But by, in legally speaking, at that point, marriage has occurred.
So you need to be the proper person to do it. You can't just do that to random people on the bus.
But nonetheless, it works. If you say, I sentence you to 15 hours of community service, the moment before the judge said that,
you had no community service sentence. The moment after it, you have to do 15 hours of community service.
You have changed a fact about the world. In this case, it's a social fact, right?
There's a social contract that upheld, but still, um, you have changed something about the world.
Um, I swear that I didn't steal your cookie. This is a speech act as well.
You're doing something above and beyond. If I say, I didn't steal your cookie, that's a statement.
That's a declarative. If I say, I swear that I didn't steal your cookie,
that's sort of like an escalation. Like, I truly, truly, deeply did not steal your cookie,
and I am willing to attest to that. And very often, it's, I swear on vowels, or something that means something to somebody.
Why did, okay, nerd. Um, but nonetheless, saying, I swear X, often has more weight.
It is doing a thing, right? Um, I apologize for eating your cookie. It's a similar thing, right?
When you say, I apologize for X, you are doing a thing. You are making some, you are making an action
that could potentially make somebody feel better. I agree to your terms is yet another kind of a speech act.
When you say, I agree to your terms to somebody, or when you write that down, or when you click the button
at the bottom of the 150 pages Apple makes you scroll through, um, at that point, something has
changed about the world by doing that act. Or saying, I formally object to you doing this.
You would do this only in a concept, or in a context where that makes sense, right? Where there is a process.
But you're basically saying, I am going to trigger a process here. By saying this, I am putting myself
on record as objecting to this. I think this is a bad idea, and it shouldn't be done, and I want this
to be referenced later on. So all of these things are speech acts. They are cases where you are
talking, or writing, or something like that, or signing, but you are doing something by virtue
of having done that. And speech acts are a very weird kind of speech in a lot of ways. They have
four big and important characteristics. One, they are always in the present. You would never say,
for instance, if somebody, if my wife gets home, sees her cookie is missing, and I say to her,
I swore that I didn't steal your cookie, or I will swear that I didn't steal your cookie.
Does that accomplish it? No, not really. That doesn't actually cover anything. If I say,
I apologized for eating the cookie, is that the same thing as saying, I apologize, or I will
apologize for eating the cookie? Have you done the thing? No. The thing is done in present tense. I
will agree to your terms. It's not the same thing as saying you agree to them, right? Saying to a
lawyer, I will sign this contract. You have not signed this contract. It ain't over till it's
over, right? Speech acts are also always first person. Saying, I agree to your terms, you can't
walk up to somebody and say, you agree to my terms. That's not a speech act. That's not valid.
It doesn't work that way. You couldn't say, she declares you husband and wife. Wouldn't work. Not
a thing. Robert swears he never ate the cookie. You could be reporting this statement, right? You
could be saying, I overheard Robert swearing that, but it's not a speech act. It's just a
declarative, right? And you can do it in first person singular, I, or first person plural, we.
The jury find the defendant guilty right there at that moment, something changed. Life is different
now. So in this case, um, these have to be first person. Unlike most other parts of speech,
they're always using a subset of verbs, right? You could never say I walk into the room as a
speech act. Maybe, maybe in like a dungeons and dragons context or a collaborative storytelling
thing, you could do that, but it's not exactly the same thing. It's not a speech act in the
classical sense of I'm changing something in our real world, in the meat space world that we all
inhabit, so to speak. I can't say, I say you're going to enjoy homework for probably will, but
it's not a speech act, right? I brush my teeth. Nope, not a speech act. And they depend on social
context. If you say, if you sentence somebody to community service, it requires you to be a judge,
right? There were these, without going too deep into it, there, there were groups of people on
the internet who believe that they are able to, uh, find people arbitrarily because they are their
own judge. Right. And so, you know, Oh, I, I sentence you government official to, you know,
a hundred and 50 bazillion dollars worth of fines payable, and I will file liens against your person.
And it's a world, right? Um, a fascinating world, but it's a world. Um, this doesn't work unless you
have societal power to do this. If you were made a judge, if you are our sentence, or I'm sorry,
if you are created as a judge, if you are judged, it's not a verb, there's got to be something
invested. If you are judged, we'll just use that. Um, then you can do this. Otherwise you can't,
I declare you married requires you to be an officiant. And this depends state by state.
Of course, uh, some places require you to be, you know, of a clergy or a judge other places,
as long as you do something, you can do that. Um, look, you just need to have some variety of power,
uh, delegated to you by the state, because at least for the moment, uh, marriage is partially
sanctioned by the state. Um, the, I apologize for eating your cookie. It only works if you say that
to the person whose cookie you stole, right? I, if I feel really bad about something, I can't walk
up to some random, you know, the cashier at Vaughn's and go, I'm really sorry. I stole my
wife's cookie last night. They're going to look at me like, Oh, wow, you're special. Um, and it
ain't going to be the good kind of special, right? And it won't have any effect at all on my healing
the wounds of my wife who didn't have a cookie. There are usually other rituals involved because
these are very ritualistic. So some of these things, like I swear to tell the whole truth,
the truth or the truth, the whole truth and nothing about the truth. So help me God.
Usually you put your hand on some kind of a, an object or something like that,
or maybe there's a handshake. I agree to your terms. You shake hands and that seals it.
Or a wedding ceremony is another ritual involved. Even if that's as short as going to a justice of
the peace at a courthouse, right? All of these things involve some level of ritual. And certainly
a court proceeding is a ritual par excellence. So all of these things are socially context or
socially context dependent, right? Not everything is a speech act. Now, if I press this button here,
YouTube is going to strike this video down with the fury of a thousand angry gods. Um, this is a
clip from the office and this is an amazing clip from the office. I highly encourage you to watch
it, but it hinges on the fact that declaring bankruptcy is not a speech act. So, um, I
encourage you to check that out. So which of the below sentences is not a speech act. I'm sorry,
which of the below sentences is a speech act. So a is we ate 10 cookies last night. B I might've
eaten 10 cookies last night. See, I swear to you, I have no idea who ate the cookies. D I
formally declared so young to be a competent researcher and E she sentenced Carla to three
weeks of house arrest. Okay. So we ate 10 cookies last night. First sign past tense and not a
speech act verb. So a isn't going to be it. I might've eaten two cookies or 10 cookies last
night. Again, that's actually the might part is present, but it's not really a speech act. D verb,
right? That doesn't make sense. I formally declared so young to be a competent researcher.
This feels pretty good, right? Formally declare that speech acting past tense. So this is saying
I declared them in the past to be a competent researcher. And then finally, she sentenced Carla
to three weeks of house arrest. This is a statement. It's not saying it's not first person,
which is really important and it's past tense. So the only speech act here is, I swear to you,
I have no idea who ate the cookies. And after this presentation, my wife will never believe me
that somebody else broke in and ate the cookies again, because I basically threw implicature.
Yeah, it's been bad. So the context dependence of these is why these end up landing in pragmatics
land, right? And why they're very difficult actually for us to interpret outside of a
pragmatic context. Now, there are other things in the world that depend on context. And one of the
big ones is Dykesis. Dykesis is, uh, well, let's give an example here. Imagine you walk outside
and you find a ground or a note on the ground. You find a ground on the note. I guess that all
depends on your perspective, right? Either way. Um, if you find a note on the ground outside,
you'll read the note says, meet me here tomorrow at this time.
What does that mean? When do you meet them? Well, tomorrow, but really? Because you don't know when
the note was placed. Maybe that note was placed last week. So tomorrow would have been last
Thursday. That's possible. Maybe the note was placed at 5 p.m. And so they meant 5 p.m., but
it's currently 2 p.m. That wouldn't make sense. Maybe the note blew along the path. Maybe the
note, you found it in Muir, but it actually got its start over in 6th someplace, right? Um, that
would be a whole different thing. This is not an interpretable note because all of these things,
oh, and by the way, who are you meeting? Me. Who's me? You don't know. The person who wrote the note,
right? All of these things depend on some element of the conversational context to interpret their
meaning. And so this note is completely and totally useless, right? Um, and so you can't
figure out where's here, who's me, when's tomorrow, and at what time? Because all of these are
deictic expressions. They make reference to discord context, uh, discord. Wow. Discourse
context. Although actually, deixes can make sense, uh, reference to context within discord. That's
true. Um, and they don't have meaning outside of that context, right? So a deictic word is a word
whose meaning depends entirely on conversational context. And I don't mean this, and I want to
be very clear about one thing. Oftentimes lexical, uh, ambiguity can be like this, right? Uh, for
instance, if I have the word B-A-S-S, uh, which can either be bass or bass, depending on what you're
talking about. Um, if somebody is talking about a concert they went to the other day and you say,
how was it? And, and they text you back, there was, uh, um, I really did. I didn't care for it.
There was a lot of B-A-S-S. In that case, it's not really hard to interpret that they mean bass,
right? A lot of strong, uh, bass frequency vibration, as you can tell by this gesture
right here, which is actually way slower than bass should be. Anyways, I digress. Um, you know,
it's not about fish because of context, but deixes, that is an ambiguity resolved by context.
This is something where the words meaning depends entirely on context. So types of deictic words
would be things like pronouns, right? Me doesn't work unless you know who's talking, right? Us
doesn't work unless you know who's in the room. Him doesn't work. So for instance, imagine that
you're, you get a recording randomly delivered to you and the only words that are spoken are,
you know, so what are we going to do tomorrow? This doesn't, you don't know who we is, right?
That doesn't provide information as opposed to what are you, Sarah and myself, Will going to do
tomorrow. That makes a little bit more sense. Um, but anyways, pronouns are deictic.
Temporal expressions are as well, because today doesn't mean anything outside of the context where
today is the day that I'm filming this in. Next month doesn't mean anything unless you know what
month it currently is. Now refers to now, then refers to some time in the past and soon has a
limited fall off, right? If I say right now, oh, I'm going to see you soon. Does that mean five
minutes? Probably maybe 10 minutes, 20 minutes, two hours, three hours, two days, three days,
two weeks, three weeks, two months, three months, three years. It's getting less and less likely as
you go further out. Soon kind of falls off, but it's always with reference to the moment,
to the exact moment of conversation. Locatives are very deictic. So for instance, meet me here.
You don't even know where here is. Actually you do. It's my house because we're all in our houses,
right? But anyways, uh, here is hard for you to understand without knowledge of where we are,
right? Or, oh, I'll see you there. That depends on us having a context, right? Like, oh, we're going
to go to Vons. I'll see you there. Um, or, you know, close, uh, just means nearby to where you
are right now or across the street actually tends to mean. So for instance, oh, you know, it's, uh,
you should go to that grocery store. Wow. That's sounds like all I go to. You should go to that
tattoo parlor. It's across the street from you. That requires them to know where they are. That
requires context demonstratives like this or that. Oh, I like this tea and doesn't give you
any information unless you know specifically what's in here. This is a bohey tea. It's really
good by the way. Um, I know you were concerned and then that the other, all of those things,
these are demonstratives. So which of these sentences does not contain any dike dick words?
So a Rick and Graham had their wedding there. B I'm not sure who you're talking about. C Mahesh
will see to it next week. D Sally took some students out for dinner at a sushi restaurant
and E John saw a coffee shop across the parking lot. Think about it and then come back on pause
when you are ready. It's going to be amazing. So a Rick and Graham had their wedding there.
Where's their context? Need it. So there is dike dick. Um, B I'm not sure who you're talking about.
I is dike dick. You is dike dick. So we don't know. Mahesh will see to it next week.
Two dike dick issues there. A it, you need context to understand that. Maybe it's a brand
new project that's, you know, getting done or maybe it's just, you know, bringing some
used paint to the paint store, uh, or something like that. Either way,
you don't know what it means. And next week depends on the timing of what was said there
in E John saw a coffee shop across the parking lot from what? Dikesis. You need to know where
John was in order to understand where the parking lot, what was across the parking lot from him.
And then D Sally took some students out to dinner at a sushi restaurant.
None of these things are dike dick. It's at a sushi restaurant. So there's no specific
referent there. We don't know who the students are, but we don't necessarily need to. It's
just some students. We know that Sally is so E I'm sorry. D is the correct answer here.
So dike dick expressions need context to be understood. And this is a big problem actually
for natural language processing, for using computers to understand speech. For instance,
if I say something like John, we'll meet you here. This in means that you need to know where
they are, right? You need to know the location where that was said. Ron scheduled her for two
weeks out. If you come across this in a note and you're trying to put this on a timeline,
that's really tough, right? Because it could mean that Ron scheduled her for two weeks after
the appointment during which Ron met with her, or it could mean Ron scheduled her for two weeks
after this particular bit of text was written. We're not actually a hundred percent sure. So
likely they're pretty similar in temporality. If you ever want to get into temporal relations
in text, come talk to me. Oh my God. Come talk to me. Um, but still this is tough.
She'll need to come back for a consult shortly. So back where who's she and when is shortly,
does that mean two weeks, two months, two years, probably something more on the order of two weeks,
maybe even a few days, but either way, um, these are all very difficult. Mary's parked across the
street from there. You need to know there. All of these things depend on past elements of
conversation, right? Um, and so if I say John will take care of it next week, you're going to
understand, oh, we were just talking about this software project and John's an awesome software
writer. So he'll be really good at that. He'll take care of it next week. They're going to have
a great time. This makes a lot of sense. If you were just talking about the fact that, you know,
Carlos and Miranda are going to be going to Palm Springs for a vacation or something like that,
I don't know if you probably have a great time there. Um, the cat will win the show for sure.
Both the cat and the show require Dyches to understand which ones they refer to. Maybe
you're talking, you were just talking about this amazing, you know, British short hair cat. I think
that's a type of cat, um, that you just saw on YouTube and you're like, yeah, they said they're
bringing that cat to the show. That cat will win the show for sure. 100%. Yes. So all of these
things depend on past elements. It's really useful to know conversational context, to be able to
interpret dyctic things. And we've actually seen this before already in the form of definite and
indefinite articles. The definite article refers to something that has already been defined as
opposed to the indefinite article, which refers to something that hasn't yet been defined. So this is
really kind of cool, right? We, this does a lot of work for us. If somebody says, uh, did you go
to the store? What does that generally mean? Generally, it's something like, did you go to
the grocery store? Did you go to the store that we usually shop at? Right. Or maybe there's prior
reference versus did you go to a store? That's kind of a weird question to ask somebody, but
maybe for instance, they, um, they were expecting you home 20 minutes ago and they might ask, oh,
did you go to a store? And just to get information, right? But there you don't know which store it is.
You're just asking if they went to any of them. I saw a man last week. Pretty easy, pretty boring,
right? It was at the grocery store. Saw a man last week. I saw the man last week. If I were to say
that just randomly to my wife, she would kind of start scrambling, trying to figure out what we
meant, what I meant by that. Maybe, you know, oh, we were talking about, I don't know, a random guy
who was dressed very strangely walking down the street, uh, near where we live. And, and if I said,
I saw the man last week, she'd think about it for a second, go, oh, the guy who's dressed weirdly.
So she would need to dig way deep in context to get that. Um, if I say a handyman can fix the door,
that usually means that, you know, oh, any kind of handy man can do that. Um, as opposed to if I
say the handyman can fix the door, that would imply that I actually have a handyman who I'm
aware of. I think that's still a thing you can get. Um, but, uh, you know, you should talk to,
you know, Roger, he's a great handyman. He can fix the door. Or you should just ask your handyman
on the assumption that somebody knows a handyman that they prefer, right? My cat is going to be in
a show versus my cat is going to be in the show implies that you have a shared referent. If I say
the, uh, for what that show is. And we know these reference based on discourse. And this whole idea
is called, uh, an Africa, uh, resolving the reference of different terms, trying to figure
out, okay, I have this term here. What does it point back to in the text? Really, really cool
problem again in, in natural language processing. So there's a lot more to this information.
Structure of discourse is huge. New information versus old information. Who does what refer to
what's being contrasted because you can do this, right? We can do this with prosody. We can do this
otherwise. Like, no, no, no. Mary's going to the park next week by saying it in that way.
You understand that somebody had just said it incorrectly. They said John was going to the park.
Um, so contrast is important, but that's a whole other bag of worms and when we don't have time
for, but all of that put together is a sampling of pragmatics, right? The idea that meaning of
some things is inseparable from the discourse context and that discourse context actually
gives meaning to things within there. And this is the final of our major subfields. We're going to
terribly underdescribe. What I mean by that is, ah, quarter system, quarter system. It's brutal.
Absolutely brutal. I would love to spend two weeks on each of these subfields, right? It would be
amazing, but we can't. Uh, so instead we, we are forced to just buzz through. This is great. Your
greatest weakness, uh, interpreting semantics of the question, but ignoring the pragmatics. Well,
could you give an example? Yes, I could. Amazing. So they have read the semantics. They know what
that means, but they've ignored the pragmatics, which is, Hey, give me an example of this. Um,
which is just, it's great. So this brings us back to our linguistic subfields, right? We've talked
about the major subfields. And of course, there's always a little bit of debate as to what counts
as a major subfield and what doesn't. And there were some very plausible ones that we've not
really touched on. Psycholinguistics one could argue is very much a subfield of linguistics.
Sociolinguistics is a major subfield of linguistic, but we've talked about sort of the canonical ones,
the ones that are big enough that we have dedicated classes for them. Actually, no,
we have a sociolinguistics class, but anyways, um, we've talked about the big ones that are
historically well-known at least. Um, and that's phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics,
and pragmatics. There are other fields. We'll talk about that a little bit more. Um, but we've
treated them all as independent. We kind of segmented them out into like, okay, this week,
we're talking phonetics, then phonology, then syntax, then morphology. Well, vice versa,
but they're really not actually that independent. They're all interconnected. This is a kind of an
intersectionally thing. So let's think about how they mix for a few minutes. Syntax and phonetics,
very far apart this quarter, but very closely related. And the area where these mix is prosody.
The elements of speech that aren't vowels and consonants, things like pauses, things like
pitch, things like timing, things like chunking, things like emphasis, uh, volume, that kind of
thing. All of these things go into prosody, right? And incorrect prosody is a great way to bother
people. We talked about this already with list intonation. I'm going to the store to get carrots,
peas, carrots, milk, cat food, and cereal. And then people wait. Um, but you can do other things.
You can say, for instance, I, if I see this sentence, I saw the Duke of Edinburgh speak.
That's how you would generally say this sentence. But you could say something like, I saw the Duke
of Edinburgh speak. I saw the Duke of Edinburgh speak. That doesn't work because that makes it
seem like he's the Duke of Edinburgh speak, which is a thing. Or I saw the, or I saw the Duke of
Edinburgh speak. That doesn't really, yeah, you can screw up prosody and have a lot of fun there.
Um, did you see me at the cat show? That's how you would normally say it, but you can
use falling intonation just to mess with people. Did you see me at the cat show?
Like you can do this, but it has a very specific and very different meaning of like,
I'm disappointed that you saw me there. And here's a really fun one. Asking somebody,
did you go to the store? That's one thing, but asking somebody, Hey, did you go to the store?
Did you go to the store? What does this mean? This doesn't mean the grocery store anymore.
Did you go to the store? Makes it sound somehow illicit, right? It makes it sound somehow dirty.
No doubt. All of you are thinking of the store in your particular life, but it makes it sound
very, very different. So asking somebody, Hey, did you go to the store? Is very different than,
Hey, did you go to the store? And they will look at you so weirdly if you do this.
Um, and usually tell you it's none of your business. How weird is this? By the way,
just prosody can make this word dirty. Um, here's a really good way to just mess with poets. Um,
what are the roots that clutch? What branches grow out of this stony rubbish? Son of man,
you cannot say or guess for, you know, only a heap of broken images where the sun beats and
the dead tree gives no shelter, the cricket, no relief and the dry stone, no sound of water.
Only there is shadow under this red rock coming under the shadow of this red rock.
And I will show you something different from either your shadow at morning striding behind
you or your shadow at evening rising to meet you. I will show you fear in a handful of dust.
This is by the way, a very good way to punish poets, find their favorite poets and then
threaten to give them to text to speech, right? Because you get something that is fundamentally
not art, right? There is an element of poetry that is very much artistic and text to speech
is unable to do that. I will show you something different from either your shadow at morning
striding behind you or your shadow at evening rising to meet you. I will show you fear in a
handful of dust. That feels much better than what the text to speech did because we as humans,
and maybe you disagree. I don't know. I like the poem, but I don't claim to be a professional,
right? Um, but nonetheless, I, this will give you something fundamentally different read by a human
and read by a text to speech algorithm, which is just not going to be good at prosody, right?
So prosody is really important. Wow. Text to speech is hard. You should take Ling six. You'll
find out more. Um, because we talk all about this kind of thing. Um, that's a plug. Yes. I know.
Um, phonetics and pragmatics, these two things interface a great deal too, because you can use
stress for contrastive focus. Like, no, I saw Steve last weekend. I touched on this earlier.
This implies that you made the right, or you made the wrong choice. Initially. Um, Mary went to the
park last weekend, not John. So you stress that the phonetics can be really powerful there. I went
to the store versus I went to the store again, all of these things carry pragmatic meaning.
And so this is syntax as well as a pragmatics, as well as phonetics, morphology and phonology
are real tight, right? There is a reason that we generally advise students to take phonology
before they take morphology because otherwise you're going to have a pretty bad time, right?
So for instance, English refrigerate, great, cool, cool word, right? Um, let's add on a morpheme,
the agentive morpheme. So we get refrigerator. So refrigerate refrigerator. There aren't really
many changes to this word here. You're just adding the error on the end there.
Compare that to photograph and photographer,
refrigerate, refrigerator, basically the same words, photograph, photographer. It's not photograph
and it's not photographer. It's photograph, photographer. Oof. Oof. So this is a really cool
phenomenon. And in fact, entire areas within morphology and phonology are interested in how
this might work in ways that these kinds of things can happen. We're adding and adding
in ways that these kinds of things can happen. We're adding an affix completely destroys this
word, or at least makes it change entirely. And it doesn't do anything to this word,
which is just awesome, right? So morphology and phonology interface, syntax and semantics. Oh,
we've been all over that already. Things like verb frames, argument structure. Those things
are tightly linked syntax and pragmatics. I saw John last weekend carries a meaning, right? It
was John that I saw last weekend. Generally speaking, emphasizes the fact that it was John
rather than Mary. John is who I saw last weekend. Last weekend, I saw John. This is emphasizing the
weekend. John, I saw last weekend. This means that you've been in the middle of a list. You know,
for instance, Herbie, I saw at the fair. Karen, I saw last weekend yelling at a manager and John,
I saw last weekend. Sorry, Karen's not the world. It's a thing, right? Speaking of pragmatics and
connotation, more importantly, the whole Karen meme is kind of amazing from a semantic perspective.
And then John, saw him last weekend, I did. Kind of weird, right? But all of these things will
carry slightly different pragmatic forces. Plus, there are all the other fields we haven't talked
about yet, like language change and historical linguistics. We'll get a little bit into that
next time, thinking about typology, thinking about language families and things like that.
Sociolinguistics, we've touched on a little bit in the first lecture. I'm sorry, I guess it'd be
third, talking about dialect and sociolect and idiolect. Psycholinguistics, we've talked about
a little bit in the first, but again, computational linguistics, I just drop in everywhere because I
have a problem, right? Neurolinguistics, we mentioned briefly, but all of these things are
very, very big subfields. And then language acquisition, that's one of the ones that's
especially troublesome, right? Because how do kids pick all this stuff up? Like, this stuff is
hard for adults. How do kids learn this? Seriously, whoa. Every one of these subfields interacts with
every other subfield. We talk about these as separate things, but they're not. Really, this
is a schema for representing our knowledge within the field. We have tongue knowledge that lives in
phonetics. We have sound pattern knowledge that lives in phonology, but then parts of that lives
in morphology, and then there's syntactic sides of it too. We think about all these as regions,
but it's really hard to draw these exact lines, and the lines are going to differ from language
to language, right? If you have a language like, for instance, Wichita, where most of the words,
where a lot of the words, that is, are single, I'm sorry, where a lot of the things that would
be used for sentences in English are single words in this language, the role of syntax kind of takes
a bit of a back burner and instead starts feeling like morphology. Although actually, some
syntacticians still do very much work in polysynthetic languages, including one of our
own, Michelle Yuen. All of those kinds of things work differently depending on the language,
depending on the lines. The thing is, you need to know all of these things, and linguistics grad
school will make you do some work in every area. When you go on to linguistics grad school, you
will find yourself looking at all of the subfields again, but in greater depth, right? It is a very
sad linguist who knows only one subfield, right? We all specialize, right? I'm a phonetician,
and I've got this weird secondary specialization as a computational linguistics person, but
generally speaking, even if you focus only in one area, you know enough phonetics,
you know enough phonology, enough morphology, because you can't run, you can't hide. And this
is the advantage to a ling major, rather than just taking one or two courses, because I know some of
you are going, well, I don't know, I think I might be a linguist, but I'm also an electrical
engineer, and I don't want to declare the full-on major. Just do it. Just do it. Come on, you can do
it. We believe in you. Nonetheless, you get that full, well-rounded experience, and you get to see
all of these things interacting properly. So put differently, you cannot run, you cannot hide.
Phonetics will find you. So just learn the damn IPA, okay? So I know what you're thinking. Will,
of course, I want to declare a ling major. What classes do I have to look forward to?
Well, as you're planning for your ling major, I'm going to give you just a listing of classes
that are generally available in each quarter. So in the fall, usually you get ling 110.
Usually you get ling 8, Languages and Cultures of America, or ling 6, Linguistics of Invented
Languages, which is a really fun class, by the way. Sign Language and Their Cultures, ling 7.
All of those are available in the fall. You should definitely plan to take phonetics
next fall, just as soon as you can, because that will give you the gateway to phonology,
which gives you the gateway to morphology. Because in the winter, you'll have 111, which you'll want
to take as well, phonology. Then you might take ling 6, Language and Computers. There will be
puns there. Or ling 112, Speech Sounds and Speech Disorders, or 121, Syntax, or Language of
Influence. When that's offered, that's a great class. And then morphology is offered usually
in the spring, along with semantics, along with pragmatics. All of those things are going to be
awesome. And so it's a good idea to start thinking already about, okay, in the fall I'll take
phonetics, then phonology, then morphology, and then I want to get syntax in as well,
and then let's do semantics, and the next year I'll come around, I'll get pragmatics,
or something like that. If you want more information, contact linginfo at ling.ucsd.edu
for more information about the major. They can help you. They can sit down with you and look
through your major that exists and say, hey, cool, all you need to take are these four classes,
and you've got a ling major. Amazing. So anyways, not that there was a hard sell there. Nope,
not at all. Wrapping up today, conversational maxims allow us to imply things with language.
Implicature is everywhere. Speech acts are a thing. Dixis is referentacular,
and pragmatics is very much contextual, and you cannot, contextual, that's how you say that word,
and you cannot hide from any element of language. It will find you. Next time we'll talk a little
bit about language families and typology. Thank you all so very much, and have a wonderful rest
of your day.
