Okay, hi everybody. Today we're going to talk a little bit about languages sort of at a little bit of a broader level.
How are languages related to each other? What differentiates languages? Those kinds of questions.
And to do that we're going to also take a look at typology as sort of a subfield within linguistics.
So our plan for today is to talk about languages versus dialects.
Because we kind of glossed over that earlier on in the quarter.
We'll talk about language families generally. We'll talk about language relationships.
How can languages be related? How can we tell?
And we'll talk about some of the major families that are out there and whether all languages are actually related.
So to start with, let's talk about the idea of language versus dialect, right?
How can we tell if people are speaking two dialects of the same language or two different languages?
So this one is actually surprisingly difficult.
You would think that, you know, with our biggest level categories, right, we've got Russian and Ukrainian.
Can we actually tell things? This is tricky.
One of the common ideas that people come up with is, well, okay,
if speakers of one language can understand people speaking the other language,
then that must be that they're the same language, right? That's easy.
And so the linguistic term for this is mutual intelligibility.
When two people can understand each other when talking, there is mutual intelligibility.
Whether these people are speaking what is nominally the same language or different languages,
mutual intelligibility means that they get it, they understand each other.
And this is cool, right? This is very common because obviously English speakers understand English speakers.
By and large, this is true.
It's possible that there are some dialects of English that are so divergent that if you were to put, you know,
somebody from one very particular area in the room with somebody from another very particular area,
there would be some difficulty. But by and large, there would be mutual intelligibility.
Similarly, Russian speakers, by and large, understand Russian speakers.
And by and large, Russian speakers don't understand English speakers when we are speaking to each other.
You know, there are parts that will get through, no doubt, but there is a language barrier, right?
And so the presence of this language barrier would imply that Russian and English are fundamentally different languages.
This feels promising. This feels like, oh, wow, okay, great, we've got a definition.
But the problem comes when you get things like this.
A dialect continuum is a geographical continuum of speakers where people nearby to one another might understand each other,
but more distant speakers might not.
A really good example of this is actually Arabic, right?
Arabic is a large dialect continuum.
Many, many people around the world speak Arabic.
And in fact, there are people not even shown in this map here.
But people who speak Arabic from different regions won't necessarily all understand each other, right?
If you have somebody who is a speaker of Saudi Arabic, they might not understand a speaker of Moroccan Arabic well.
Because fundamentally, Moroccan Arabic and Saudi are very different, both linguistically speaking and in terms of distance, right?
So in Arabic, you can have two people that both speak Arabic, but don't anymore quite understand each other, which is really fascinating.
And so here you have a case where two things that are both one language and that share a writing system,
that share a written language even, they don't understand each other.
So this gets a little weird, right?
So if Moroccan Arabic speakers don't understand Egyptian Arabic speakers, that is a little strange for using this as the criterion, right?
But if they write it down in written Arabic, then they both understand that, because in practice, they're bilingual.
They have the written Arabic, and they also have their spoken version.
And they happen to share this language.
So this is tricky. Does that count? Is that enough to make these the same language?
Ukrainian speakers understand Russian speakers, and vice versa.
By and large, you can get by, I'm told.
Swedish, Danish, and Norwegian speakers, by and large, understand each other, for the most part.
Again, there are some areas where it's a little bit funky, but by and large, there is good mutual intelligibility here,
although we would clearly consider them to be very different languages, right?
And Brazilian Portuguese speakers understand Spanish speakers way better than the other way around.
This one was fun. I actually spent some time in Brazil, and I'm a speaker of Spanish.
And so I remember speaking to people in Spanish, and they just got it, right?
And then they would speak back to me in Portuguese, and I would just stare.
Because, oh my God. And so this is really frustrating.
This is called asymmetrical mutual intelligibility.
It's a thing. It's an amazing thing.
But here we have a situation where there's not even that symmetry anymore.
So, if we use mutual intelligibility as a criterion, then maybe Arabic isn't one language.
Maybe Russian and Ukrainian are one language, and Swedish and Danish and Norwegian are pretty damn close.
And then, weirdly enough, Brazilian Portuguese and Spanish are one language to Brazilians, but they're not.
They're also fundamentally different. This is tricky.
And by the way, would speakers of Amish English necessarily understand rural New Zealanders?
There are questions here.
So, mutual intelligibility probably isn't the thing that's going to save us here.
That's not going to be the thing that allows us to tell languages apart,
that allows us to draw a clean line between different languages rather than different dialects.
What else? Same writing system. Here's a good one.
Shared writing systems are very, very common.
Literate English speakers, who are, I guess, literish as well, use the same...
Although, actually, the fact that I said literish means that they're not fully literate by virtue of scalar implicature.
Anyways, literate English speakers would use the same writing system by and large.
And so, this means that any English speaker around the world will more or less be able to understand each other in writing-ish,
assuming that there aren't too many dialectal, dialectal, socio-electal things going on there.
And this is, by the way, the same writing system as Tagalog, Romanian, and Vietnamese,
which... that's awkward.
Russian and Mongolian both use Cyrillic, which these languages are not remotely mutually intelligible,
not really remotely related, right?
Moroccan and Yemeni Arabic have a writing system in common, but they have very, very little else, right?
And that's just because the writing system is standardized to one particular text, the Quran.
And so, in this case, we get weird things if we say shared writing system means shared language,
because all English speakers are speaking the same languages, Tagalog, Romanian, Vietnamese, etc.
That one's dangerous, right?
So, okay.
Maybe mutual intelligibility, maybe not great.
Shared writing system, probably not great.
How about just if speakers agree that they're speaking the same language?
Let's look at Serbo-Croatian as an example here.
And some of you with background in that area might be going,
oh, Will, that's an old term, that's not the right term.
So, yes, it is.
Unfortunately, to linguists, very often this language will be spoken of as Serbo-Croatian or BCS,
Bosnian, Croatian, Serbian.
But what happened here is that this language was spoken in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Serbia, Montenegro, and Croatia.
All of those countries spoke Serbo-Croatian.
Up until the 1990s, there were four dialects of this language,
one for Bosnia, one for Serbia, one for Croatia, one for Montenegro.
These were considered to be dialects of the same language.
But then Yugoslavia, the country that formerly encompassed those, broke apart,
and a war started, and there were a lot of really, really unpleasant things that went on here,
massacres and things like that.
This was a massive conflict with a great deal of human pain and toll.
And as a result of this conflict now, people believe very firmly that there are four different languages,
and they are spoken by four different people, and they are in four different countries.
It seems to be considered one language because of this war,
and I'm not judging in any way, shape, or form here,
but because of this, frankly, animosity that has come up here,
people are no longer willing to say, I speak the same language as that group.
And that's quite understandable, right?
But as a result, we now have four different languages,
when in practice, a lot of the criteria for these are the same language are met.
And what's funny is, if we look at where these languages are spoken,
in yellow here is Serbian, in blue here is Montenegrin, which is spoken entirely in Montenegro,
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, that's where Bosnian is spoken,
and in Croatia, Croatian is spoken.
So this is very much feeling political, right?
This is very much feeling, and not necessarily political.
That makes it sound, I don't want to diminish the suffering involved here,
but it makes it feel very much social.
And people saying, I don't speak the same language as those people.
And again, that's a perfectly reasonable thing to do socially,
but it's not exactly a linguistic change.
So now we have different dialects that could be languages,
but are actually considered dialects, like Arabic.
Or, well, a whole bunch of other things, right?
Moroccan and Egyptian Arabic being a nice example.
We have languages that could very easily be dialects of each other,
like Bosnian, Croatian, Serbian, Montenegrin.
Or, for instance, Hindi and Urdu is another good example of this.
The fact that Hindi and Urdu are considered to be independent linguistically
is largely a political choice.
And then different languages where speakers can understand each other,
like, for instance, Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish.
All of those things are interesting, right?
We have all of these situations.
And so the relationship between languages and dialects is clearly complicated.
You can have different dialects that could be languages,
different languages that could be dialects.
There's no clear line here.
And so what really makes a language different from a dialect?
Generally speaking, linguists come down with this quote, right?
A language is a dialect with an army and a navy.
It sounds trite, it sounds silly, but actually it holds pretty well, right?
If you have one country and two peoples,
and those peoples are at peace, by and large, they're speaking two dialects.
But that is, and there are, there are, of course, areas where this is gradient, right?
Spanish is spoken in the U.S., but no one considers Spanish to be a dialect of English.
But still, by and large, when you have to make these divisions,
oftentimes it is a political decision, or it is a social decision,
or it is a national decision, rather than being one of linguistics.
Linguistics very often isn't sort of the force,
or even isn't able to describe exactly why
languages are considered to be one, either one language with dialects,
or one dialect, I'm sorry, many languages independently.
So calling something a language or a dialect is a political choice and not a linguistic choice, usually.
And if you want to unite yourself with a group, they're speaking a dialect of your language,
as opposed to if you want to distance yourself from a group, they're speaking another language.
It's worth saying that this shows up here in the U.S. all the time, right?
So a lot of the pushback...
That's stupid.
Okay, when people first started talking about Ebonics, right?
Using that term, the idea of African American vernacular English,
Ebonics was a term that was very often used to other this population.
It was to say, those people speak a whole different language.
It's not English, it's what they speak over there.
And so distancing yourself by giving it a whole new name.
Same thing you get, by the way, with Spanglish.
Oh, those people are speaking Spanglish.
No, they're speaking English and they're throwing in bits of Spanish,
or they're speaking in Spanish and throwing in bits of English.
But again, the idea that these are different, those people are...
This is a political choice.
This is a social choice, not necessarily linguistic.
So we do, though, have to still describe linguistic relationships between language, though.
Whether we call them languages, whether we call them dialects,
the fact is there are groups of people,
and this group of people over here is speaking in one way,
this group of people over here is speaking in a different way.
How are those ways that they're speaking similar?
And so as linguists, rather than directly engaging with,
these are languages, these are dialects, etc.,
by and large what we'll do instead is use, sort of just for handy reference,
the general phrasing, right?
We'll talk about Russian versus Ukrainian,
because that's how people generally...
And we believe, at least many linguists believe very firmly,
that people have a right to self-determination.
If you believe that you speak a dialect of this language,
then we'll respect that, right?
You are allowed to describe your own language.
But nonetheless, we will talk about these languages
in terms of their relationships to one another
and in terms of their language families.
So a language family is all about patterns, right?
So let's take a look at these languages right over here.
So we have English, German, Dutch, Swedish, and Turkish.
So, which of these languages are related to each other?
Which of these languages have something in common?
If you're looking at this, you might see a pattern here.
So if we look across the row here,
the English word father, German Vater,
and then we see very similar phonologically speaking words here.
Here we've lost the intermediate consonant,
but it's still f-a-r going on there.
Here we have fish, fish, fis, fisk.
All of these cases, again, we have the same general pattern.
Same vowel.
Oh, Swedish is a little bit different here,
but not all that different, right?
You have a vowel followed by a T followed by another vowel.
And then here, again, all of these are similar.
And then there's Turkish over there doing its own thing, right?
Baba, entirely different.
Balik, entirely different.
Yemek.
And again, pardon my Turkish here.
And far could very easily be a cognate for father,
but it isn't. It's have, right?
And so all of these things show cognates.
These are words that are very similar across two languages.
And so we can look at this and ask,
are these languages related?
And we can get a pretty good sense that,
well, based on these data,
English, German, Dutch, and Swedish
sure seem like they're related.
And if when we say they're related,
one of the most plausible way for this to happen,
or the most common way for this to happen,
is for there have been a mother language.
For there had to have been a language from which
English and German and Swedish and,
what's the other one I used there?
Dutch, all came from, right?
For them to have had a shared ancestor.
You find a mother language,
and we use female terms, by the way, for languages for,
I think it's pretty arbitrary, right?
But we'll talk about a mother language.
We'll talk about sister languages.
There's not a mother and a father language.
It's just mother languages, right?
And then you get sister languages
are languages that share a single mother, right?
Are languages that are directly descended
from the same language.
So we see here, looking at these,
that English, German, Dutch, and Swedish
are all probably sister languages of some variety,
and Turkish probably isn't.
It's very, very different from the rest.
And so the mother language of all of these sisters
is a language called proto-Germanic,
a very early Germanic language
from which all of the other Germanic languages,
these guys as well as several more,
have all descended.
So how do we figure this out?
Well, this is basically how our baby language is made, right?
You're asking this question again.
Well, when speakers love a language very much,
speakers of that language can inhabit a wide area.
And then groups of speakers
might become geographically or culturally isolated.
What I mean by this is maybe they move into the next valley,
and they don't go over the mountain as often,
and so they don't have as much contact
with people speaking the language
that they originally spoke.
And after a few generations, or perhaps even sooner,
they will start to innovate.
The language will start to change on its own.
This can also be due to cultural isolation, right?
If you have a group of people who live in a walled kingdom,
even if they're very, very close
to people who speak other languages,
there's a pretty good chance
that things are going to change inside the wall, so to speak.
And then the language changes naturally.
This is an important thing to remember.
I mean, certainly there are cases
where people will forcibly change language,
where new words are kind of given into the language
for political reasons, for social reasons, etc.
I mean, languages can be changed artificially,
but by and large, what happens is
if you have two groups of people living in the same valley,
and then one of those groups of people
goes over the mountains into the next valley,
both of these languages are just going to shift, right?
Things are going to change over time.
New words will arise.
Changes will come to the grammar, etc.
And because there's not much communication
between these two groups, they might diverge.
They will change differently.
This language over here might develop yit.
This one might develop lit.
And then when they meet each other
at the top of the mountain, they're like,
yit, lit, what?
You guys are crazy.
Let's start a war.
And so you get differences in those changes.
And once you get a few hundred years to pass,
bam, you can end up with two very different languages.
A good case of this is Latin, right?
Step one for Latin was to conquer a vast empire.
This is the Roman Empire here.
And you make everybody in that area speak Latin,
because, you know, you're imperialist, right?
Why not spread your language too?
Then you screw that empire up,
and then you end up with daughter languages.
You end up with languages that are related
very strongly to Latin,
but are no longer exactly Latin.
You end up with people speaking
one daughter language in this region,
and then another one in this region,
then another one in this region,
then this one, then over there.
All of these daughter languages all come from Latin.
But because they're all a little bit isolated,
whether it's culturally, whether it's geographically,
and otherwise, you'll get shifts.
You end up with Spanish being different from French,
being different from Portuguese,
from Italian, from Romanian,
and from all of the other smaller
romance languages out there.
And so the romance languages,
and by the way, this comes from Roman,
not like, ooh, romantic, candlelit dinner.
No, this is based on Roman.
These are all the daughters and granddaughters of Latin.
And so if we look at the tree here,
you see Latin is at the very top,
and then you have classical Latin that kind of died off,
then vulgar Latin.
That just means of the people, right?
Then you get Sardinian,
and then from there, you can go over here to Dalmatian,
a Romanian, Romanian,
you get Italian, French, Occitan, Catalan,
Spanish, and Portuguese.
All of those languages have all sort of,
actually, it's not true the classical Latin has died off.
The Vatican's keeping that one alive.
But anyways, I digress.
And even then, there have been some shifts.
But all of these languages are directly descended from Latin.
But what's interesting is they're not all
at the same level, right?
It's not the case that there is Latin up here,
and then Spanish, Romanian, Occitan, Catalan, et cetera.
No, in fact, you see that there are areas,
there are groups within this.
There's the whole eastern branch here,
which is separated.
And so Romanian is a little bit different,
and a little bit more different, by and large,
than, actually, a good deal more different,
than Italian, French, Spanish, Catalan, et cetera,
because it's often its own branch there.
And, you know, Catalan and Occitan are very, very similar.
Not identical, but similar.
And Portuguese and Spanish, again, are very similar,
especially Iberian Portuguese.
That is, Portuguese spoken in Portugal,
rather than Brazil, very, very similar.
As a Spanish speaker, I have a way better time
with Iberian Portuguese than Brazilian,
because it's a little less divergent, right?
So anyways, we see here how a language family can develop.
So this gives us a sense that, okay, cool,
we can have this situation where people who speak
one language are separated or isolated
in some way, shape, or form,
and then they end up speaking other languages after time, right?
But how do you go back and reconstruct this?
This is easy in the case of Latin, right?
Because we have written records.
We know what the Roman Empire looked like, right?
We know how these languages have evolved, et cetera.
So we have a really good sense of how romance has evolved.
But what are signs that languages
where we might not have that kind of a record are related?
How can we find this?
So there are a bunch of things that could give us
good evidence about relation.
Geography is pretty low-hanging fruit, right?
If you have groups of people who live near each other,
there's a better chance than not
that they speak a related language.
This is not universally true.
Absolutely, there are lots of people
who live near people who speak an entirely different language.
But geography is a very good piece of evidence, right?
For instance, if I am making a claim
about a language family relation,
and I'm saying that an indigenous language of the Americas
is related to an indigenous language of Japan,
that's tough.
You have to come up with a really good explanation for that
that doesn't start with,
so first they got a canoe.
Because that does happen, but it's, yeah.
So geography is definitely a piece of evidence,
even though it's not the whole thing.
And so, you know, for instance,
if we look at the romance languages,
they are very, very similar in location, right?
They're all within Europe.
Although, again, Romanian is a little bit more isolated there.
And so if we look at all of these romance languages,
we can see other things
that make them very similar here.
For instance, if we look at this same declaration
in English versus French versus Breton.
Interesting.
French and Breton are both spoken
in this area right up here,
but these feel very different, right?
Everything's very different.
We're not really seeing anything at all here
that is similar between French and Breton.
Very, very, very little.
And in fact, we see some borrowings,
politiquelle, et cetera,
but by and large,
these are different, right?
So geography isn't the whole story.
Even though these languages are both spoken,
Breton and French are both spoken
in this area,
very, very, very different.
So there we go.
The genetics actually can be useful here.
Genetic studies can be used
to support hypotheses
about cultural and linguistic connections.
So if you have, for instance,
a diaspora,
and especially if it's a historical one
where you have groups, a group of people
who speak a language
and who left for whatever reason,
whether due to war, due to famine,
or just due to, you know what,
we're going to go off exploring.
We're going to find a new place.
Very often, especially if this is
sort of lost to the sands of time,
but you believe that people speaking
this language in this very isolated area,
or perhaps in a very populated area
but relatively far away from the original language,
if you believe that there's a relationship there,
you might find genetic relationships there.
This is something that has been done
and provides really cool evidence, right?
If you're able to show that the people
from this particular area who speak this particular language
have a genetic similarity
to people who speak the language
you believe they're related to,
that provides some nice evidence, right?
But the bigger method that we generally use are cognates, right?
Words that are sounding similar across languages.
So we looked at a table of these already.
All of these words in English,
German, Dutch, and Swedish are cognate.
In fact, I picked them out exactly because of that.
I tried to find words
that are going to be cognate across all of those languages.
If we look at Romance,
we can say another cognate set.
Zero? Yep, cognates.
One? Yep, cognates.
Two? Yep, cognates.
And so you can go through
and see that whereas
four has absolutely nothing to do with this,
all of the Romance languages
I've chosen here,
these have these strong cognates.
So you should look at this and go,
Related! All of these guys!
Related! Related! Oh my god, related!
So that's useful.
Another thing that you can use are
sound correspondences.
This is when a sound in a language systematically
corresponds to another sound in another language.
So for instance, we could look at this
and we could say, okay, interesting.
In Swedish,
the F
corresponds to the English F.
Okay, that's easy. But in Dutch,
actually, the F
in English turns into a V here.
And every F seems to turn
into a V, at least in this data set.
Again. And similarly, the V here
seems to turn into a B here.
Or perhaps, more likely,
the B here turned into a V
in English. Right? And so we can get
a sense of these relationships
by looking at sound correspondences.
F and V have correspondences
in these languages. V and B
have correspondences.
So sound correspondences are patterns of
correspondence, where you see every
word that has this sound in this language
has this other sound in this
language. That's a pretty strong
correlation, right? And if you can keep lining
that up, you will see this.
This is really common. And sounds will
change, often based on how they're produced
in the mouth. A lot of this comes back to phonetics.
You are very likely to get a
change, for instance, from a B to a P
or a B to an M, but you're
very unlikely to get a change from a B
to a glottal stop, because
B is made at the lips. Glottal stop
is made all the way down here. That's a big jump,
right? It can happen,
certainly, but it's very likely that they're
related articulatorily.
So D, N, and L are languages
that will very often change around,
which, by the way, is why we have
Dakota, Lakota, and Nakota.
All of these are languages
of the Great Plains here in the U.S.,
indigenous languages, and they are very closely
related. They are all related
to Proto-Suan.
The big difference is that I believe
it to be the case that Ds in
Proto-Suan became Ls in Lakota
and Ns in Nakota.
This is fundamentally the same word, it's just there's a
sound correspondence there.
If you are able to find
two languages that have some cognates
and a good number of cognates, not just like one
and not just like computer,
because a lot of borrowing happens,
and you're able to find sound correspondences,
that's a good case.
That's a really good case. Then if you
throw in other information like, and they're right
next door to each other. That helps.
And they're all genetically related.
That helps too. Wow.
Amazing. So you can definitely make
a solid case for these things on sound
alone, but with other evidence it gets even stronger.
You can also get things like
shared linguistic features. If a bunch
of languages do something in a certain way,
they might be related. So if you have
five languages nearby with a vocative
case, this is a morpheme that you add to the
end of a name as you're calling somebody's
name out. So if my name is Will,
which it happens to be, and somebody
wants to call my name,
they might add on Willa
to make sure that they're talking to me,
that they're addressing Will.
Or if it's John, it would be
Jonna. That would be a vocative case.
So if you have five languages
right near each other with a vocative case,
which is kind of uncommon, they're probably
related, right?
If you have eight languages in the same
area that have tone,
and they are surrounded by languages
that don't have tone,
that's going to be a pretty solid bet
for relation, right? Because you have
something that's, I don't want to say unusual.
A large number of the world's languages
are tonal, but if you have something that's
regionally unusual in a cluster,
there's a pretty good chance of relationship there.
So if you have a few of these things
shared among some languages, you probably
have a language family, a group
of languages that share a common
ancestor, that share a common mother language.
And we can go very
small, or we can go very big. If we
look at this little diagram here, we've already been
talking about the Romance languages, right?
These are the Romance languages. The Italic
family all come down from Latin.
But within Proto-European, which is the
bigger language family to which
the Romance languages, as well as
English in the Germanic languages,
as well as the Indo-Iranian
languages, so Iranian or Persian,
Kurdish, Hindi, as well
as the Celtic languages and the Hellenic languages.
So Greek, Scottish, as well as the Slavic
languages, like Russian, Polish,
Serbo-Croatian, all of those
things are related by virtue
of having this big common ancestor
at the top, Proto-Indo-European.
So, at this point,
we know some of these things,
right? Like Latin, that's a slam-dunk
case. We know that all of these are Romance
languages, that they're related to Latin.
We got a pretty good sense of Germanic as well,
because of all of the various, well,
all of the various correspondences
and things like that make me feel like, yeah,
these are probably related.
But how do we go deeper? How do we find deeper
language ancestry? So the start
is finding related languages. We've already been doing
that. Then the next step would be
to reconstruct what
the mother tongue might look like.
In some cases, we have written records. Latin
made it real easy, right? Like, oh, here's
the mother tongue. Cool. Let's read.
That one's straightforward.
But in some cases, you don't have that, right?
If you get into an area, for instance, and
you are the first person to work in this
language family, and this isn't a
set of languages that have a strong written
record, there might not be any
records of what the language that spawned
all of the languages in that area sounds
like, right? And so what you would
have to do is language reconstruction,
where you look at a bunch of the daughter
languages, and then you guess what
structures and sounds and words the mother
language might have had. This is very much
an art, not as much of a science.
And the thing is, we do this all the time
as humans, right? Look at this family
here. What do
all of these people likely...
I mean, what do they have in common?
They are...
gingers. They have red hair.
They have very fair skin, right?
Chances are, what do the parents
have as a feature?
They're probably
redheads, right? So we know this.
We know that there is this relationship.
These people are all wizards.
This is the Weasley family from Harry Potter.
And their parents? Probably wizards.
So we can do this. This is not
too difficult, right?
But we do it with words in a slightly
different way. We find a bunch of words that are
cognate, right? And then we try to reverse
the sound changes. If we see, okay,
10 out of the 15 languages in this
family have this particular
form here, and then 5 of them
don't. 5 of them have this other thing.
Chances are, these 5 did the innovation.
So we're just going to assume that's the mother
language here. And then you do this at a wider
scale, right? And then you find borrowings.
So, for instance, a lot of languages have a
related to English term for computer.
Because, you know, the idea
of computers
by and large has been spread by
at the very least Indo-European languages,
but many languages, Russian, for instance,
has computer as the word for computer.
Right? So you're going
to have a lot of borrowings, especially modern
technologies. So you'll kind of note those and put them aside.
But, and then
when all else fails, you just look at all the
daughter languages and you go, hmm.
Okay.
8 out of 10 of these languages have
tone. These 2 don't.
And you can use other evidence.
So chances are the mother language have
tone. And you can use other evidence. Like,
okay, 8 out of 10 have tone. These
2 don't. And these 2 have been
hanging out a lot with this language, which
doesn't have tone. Ah,
okay, that's probably what went on there.
And so you can do that. And you can reconstruct
grammar as well. Look at grammatical patterns
and structures present in the data.
And you find the ones that are shared among all of
the various languages out there.
And then you pick a shared pattern. You pick
a shared structure. And then you figure out
why the ones that don't have that
or do have some new pattern,
you figure out why that might have been.
Maybe it's influence from a nearby language.
This is super duper common.
Languages will pick up things from other languages.
Or maybe there's a conflicting pattern.
Maybe it's the case that, for instance, this
language has, ah,
what's a nice example of this?
This language has lost their case system entirely.
And so it had to change
the word order. Because if you can no
longer use case to mark who did
what to whom, to mark grammatical relations,
you might need to use word order more strongly.
And so a syntactic feature that's present
in all the other languages that have the case system,
maybe the ability to reorient
words in a certain way, in that case
that might disappear. Because you no longer
have the ability to move the words around in the same way.
So that conflict could be a good
reason why that language has
innovated, has done something a little bit differently.
And so then you would assume that
the structures present in the majority of the daughter
languages are also present in the mother language.
And this, again, makes a lot of sense,
right? It's probably most
likely. So what do these look like? If we look at
Proto-Indo-European,
you can get things like this.
These are reconstructed forms. And you
get things like vem or
kweg, I think, to vomit.
To blow, you end up with
these things. Pnu, to breathe.
This one kind of looks
reasonable-ish. We see this in pneumonia,
right, which comes to us via Greek,
I believe. But still,
and pneumothorax,
you know, that one seems familiar-ish,
right? Sme, to
laugh.
Gasto, gazdo,
stick, I guess.
All of these things are reconstructions,
not just from English, but from
every Indo-European language. And that's
a lot of them, trying to go up
the chain. And so, it doesn't
look particularly familiar to speakers of
English, even assuming that these are accurate.
And by the way, I'm not knocking on reconstruction.
It's a very hard task, and even
reconstructors sort of will
argue that, well,
we're not sure either, right?
But these don't necessarily
look familiar to speakers of any of the daughter
languages, but they do look familiar
at the language family level, right?
And so, this is
really cool. We have some understanding
of what Indo-European might look like
on the basis of this reconstruction process.
So, what's the catch?
The biggest catch is that reconstruction assumes
regularity. It assumes that changes
are predictable. It assumes that they
happen regularly, and kind of in certain orders.
But reconstruction will fail
if something changed unpredictably.
If there was something that
suddenly caused the sounds to change,
and it doesn't work in the way that
phonology usually does, that will cause a major
trouble. So, this could be as simple as,
you know, languages, you know, move
into a new valley, and they hear the
sound from somebody, and they say, oh, that's
fun. We should use that. And so,
and again, there's not like the city meeting, but
influence can happen like that. Or
there's the stereotypical case
of, you know, oh, the king has a lisp.
So, they don't want us to use words with
the S sound. So, they change all of those
to L's or something. That'd be a little
weird, right? Probably to F's
or something like that. Anyways, I
digress. You get unpredictable
changes can cause reconstructions to go
off the rails. You know,
for instance, we got rid of a Michael
Bay.
Too late.
We got rid of the verb form because it sounds too much
like Michael Bay. By the way, I wish him no harm.
I just really wish he wouldn't have done this movie
franchise.
So, you can taboo things out of
the language, and that's really hard to predict,
right? You know, for instance,
we're about to have that with
Corona, right? The beer company,
God help them at the moment, but I just saw
the other day, somebody had
a truck that was
Corona trucking, and it had a little,
the logo was Corona with a little crown on
top of it. I kind of
suspect that for the next, say,
80 years or so, that's not going to happen.
So, things like that can
happen. They're not predictable. They're
very easy to explain at the moment,
but very hard to explain looking back into
the opacity of the past. And sometimes
it's just coincidence, right? If more languages
got rid of an earlier structure than kept it,
then we're going to pretend it's a new thing.
Put differently, if you have
12 languages in a family,
and 10 of them got rid
of a feature, and 2
of them kept it, it's going
to seem like those 2 languages are the innovators,
right? It's going to seem like those 2 languages
came up with that feature,
rather than all 10 of those
languages got rid of them. This is
purely coincidental, but it's
something that can cause major trouble for reconstruction.
And the thing is, we may never know if it
failed, right? I mean, the joke is
if you hand a linguist a time machine, the very
first thing they're going to do is start looking,
checking reconstructed languages, right?
Find the homeland of the
Indo-European people, and immediately
okay, hold on, back up, how do you say
vomit? Okay, oh,
we were way off!
Yeah, that's a thing.
And we won't know this, because the sands
of time wash away all things, right?
But it's still our best shot. So as we're
looking into relationships between languages,
we want to think about finding that language
ancestry. You find related
languages, reconstruct the mother tongue,
and compare that to other mother
tongues, because you can keep going, right?
You've gotten, you know, in this case
we knew what Latin looks like, but let's say that you have
a language family that you don't have a strong
written record for, you might compare your
reconstruction to reconstructions of other
nearby greater language families,
and see, well, wait a second, these actually seem
similar, and then you go up further and further.
And then the mothers' mothers, and if they have
features in common,
maybe you've got a much bigger macro family.
So, okay,
which of the following things here
is not helpful for finding
language relations?
A, geography,
B, sound correspondence, C,
shared writing system, D,
cognates, and E, DNA and genetic
testing.
I would argue
that C is the best answer here,
because remember that writing systems are very
often not, well, they are not
an inherent part of most languages.
There are relatively few languages that
have sort of come about primarily in writing.
Right? And so,
right? By and large,
they're not going to provide great evidence,
and very often writing systems have been borrowed,
and very often writing systems have been borrowed for
completely unrelated languages, whereas
geography often provides great clues
for this. Sound correspondences
are great clues. Cognates are
the biggest clues, and DNA and
genetic testing can provide really good
compelling evidence, whereas this
is definitely not the best answer.
So, this may
make you wonder, okay, so we've talked about
Indo-European, what are some of the other major
language families? What other languages are related?
So, Indo-European, in terms of
the number of speakers, is the
largest language family.
It has the most speakers, generally speaking.
Not that the individual languages
may have the most, but that combined
all together, Indo-European
wins at this point. And it has lots of
languages within it. Indo-Iranian,
we've already talked about, the Slavic
languages, Armenian,
Greek, Albanian, Celtic, Italic,
and this is, again, all your romance,
as well as English and Faroese
they threw on there. Great. So, we've got
about 3.2 billion speakers, and
classically speaking, the range of Indo-European
was roughly like this, right?
However,
there are definitely, there's been some
spread. Let's be real here.
But all of these, and then the different colorations
represent the major different sub-families, with red
here being Germanic, and then
Slavic, etc.
Indo-Iranian. So, that's
Indo-European. Big ol' family.
Sino-Tibetan is, in terms of number of speakers,
the next biggest family.
And Sino-Tibetan is, as you might imagine,
Chinese and Tibetan. It includes
Chinese Burmese, as well,
spoken in Burma or Myanmar.
Not sure what it is at the moment.
But either way, in this country,
those three languages are the
biggest languages within Sino-Tibetan.
And Chinese is very, very widely
spoken. And so, yeah.
Sino-Tibetan's a great
language family. Niger-Congo is the
next biggest in terms of number of speakers.
And it is big. Niger-Congo
is also quite large.
You get, in the Niger-Congo family,
Bantu languages. Bantu languages
are very... This is one
of the other very, very well-studied language
families in the world. There's a lot
that's been said about Bantu. But there are lots
of other language families that
are not as well-studied here.
And, in fact, we have people working on
Niger-Congo languages in our department
as we speak, which is great.
And so, these include languages like
Swahili, Igbo, Fula,
Zulu, and Zarma.
All of these are languages spoken
within these. Swahili, you've probably heard of.
Zulu as well. But, yeah.
Lots of cool Niger-Congo languages.
Afro-Asiatic languages are another
really big language family. And these include
the Semitic languages. So,
these are languages like Hebrew,
Arabic, as well as Hausa.
Romo-Amharic is another
Semitic language.
As well as all of the various
Berber languages.
What else?
The Chadic language family is in there as well.
There are a bunch of really fun languages
spoken there. So, about 500 million
people speak those. Austronesian
languages is a big family geographically,
even though there aren't as many speakers
as some. But this includes languages
like Malay, Tagalog, Malagasy
that's spoken in Madagascar, by the way.
For some reason,
this is a trivia question that comes up
over and over again. Where is Malagasy
spoken? So, Madagascar.
Cham-Hawaiian
as well as Maori
are all spoken, are all
Austronesian languages. And that's just
the top five. There are lots, lots more
language families out there. Within the
indigenous Americas, oh my god
are there language families everywhere.
Each one of these colors is not a language
but a family. Remember we were just
talking about Lakota,
Nakota, Dakota? Yeah, that's purple
right here.
That whole region are the Siouan
languages, right? And then down here
in San Diego, you get
a bunch of Uto-Aztecan languages
but you get a bunch of other things as well.
And so you get different languages
just all over.
These are not languages, these are language families.
Within every family, there are a bunch
more languages as well as, yeah
there are so many language families
in the indigenous Americas and unfortunately so many
of these languages are gravely endangered.
So that's unfortunate.
The Amazonas area, that is the Amazon
Basin, this is the very top of South America here
is amazingly
amazingly diverse
in language families.
Holy cow!
Yeah, so
really, really strong
strong linguistic diversity in this area.
And in the Caucasus, actually
is another area where you get very, very strong
linguistic diversity, right? This is
the south of Russia, Georgia, Azerbaijan
Iran, just to give you a sense
Turkey is in this area down here.
Caspian Sea over here.
This is another very, very diverse
area with a bunch of really interesting languages.
Really cool
languages, not just Russian.
Or Iranian
or Georgian even. All of these languages
are, there's so much
fun in the Caucasus, right?
And so this is a lot of language families.
There are a ton of language families.
So this might make you ask yourself, well
okay, cool. Are all
languages related? Do all languages have relatives?
Well, that's
probably yes, right?
Unless we are making the argument that
speakers of one language in the world
actually came up with language independently.
Like this group of humans innovated
the idea of language entirely
on their own, isolated from
these folks. Assuming that there is
sort of one group of humans that
innovated language and then spread
we would assume they're all related
to each other. But we don't always know
what languages those are.
I'm sorry, we don't know what relations they have.
And these are what are called isolates.
These are languages where we have found
no contemporary relatives or ancestors.
So a good example
and kind of the example everyone uses
is Basque. Basque is a language
that is spoken in the north of Spain, in the Basque
country within Spain.
And it is sort of its own area.
There are a great deal of politics involved
in this, but the Basque region
of Spain is the only place in the
world where Basque is spoken.
And Basque is entirely
different from Spanish. Basque is
a cool language.
Like all languages are cool. Basque got some stuff
going on, right? And I'd love to
get more into it. So Basque
is isolated. We have no idea
what Basque is related to. Some people
have floated ideas, but none of it is convincing
enough for us to really feel like, oh yeah,
Basque, that's... no.
And so other well-known-ish isolates
are Ainu, spoken in Japan.
Kerok, spoken in
California. Korean, which
is probably the most well-known.
Put that at the top of the list, right?
But we're not entirely sure what Korean is related
to. Natchez, which is spoken
in, originally, Mississippi
and Louisiana. Then
we're moved, under a great deal of
force, to Oklahoma, to reservations
there. But that's an isolate
language. Azuni is spoken in New Mexico.
We don't know who
these languages are related to. Again, there
are always theories, but none of them are really
good enough that the linguistic community has been like,
yeah, that works. I'm in.
So there are isolates around the world.
We just don't know where they came from, right?
Including not so far from us, right?
So, um, this
then leads us to say, well, but
hold on, aren't all languages related?
Shouldn't there be one big language at the top
of all this? If we keep going, you know,
okay, cool, Indo-European, and then Sino-Tibetan.
What's above them?
This brings us, eventually, to the idea
of proto-human, or proto-world.
This is the postulated human
mother tongue. This comes from the idea
that surely, at some point in time, there was a group
of humans who started grunting
in a systematic way, and sooner or later
they were like, huh, cool,
this is language. We should do this more often.
And then those people then
migrated and grew and moved forth, and
all humans are developed, or descended
from that group. Again, we don't necessarily
know that language wasn't come up,
wasn't innovated more than once in the world.
That's tough for us to say.
But there is this assumption
that maybe there is a proto-world thing.
The problem with proto-world is
that it is mostly the domain of
crackpots, and there's a reason for that.
So, remember we were just talking about reconstruction,
right? The idea that you're
taking the daughter languages that
we know exist, and then postulating a mother,
and then looking at the mother
languages that you've reconstructed,
and then postulating mother languages
above those, and then above those.
Each level of this is a lot of
reconstruction. Each level of this
has all of those problems we talked about
with reconstruction. And again, I'm not
meaning to knock on reconstructionists.
No shade being thrown here. It's an amazing
field, and they do great work, but there are
lots of levels of uncertainty. And every
time you go up another level,
you increase the uncertainty
more. And so by the time
you get to what is
comparing reconstructions
of proto-Indo-European to
reconstructions of proto-Afro-Asiatic,
you are
way deep in uncertainty,
right? And so it's
no longer all that useful
to talk about proto-world.
This is also so far back
in time, like we don't even have a good sense
of where the Indo-European homeland
would have been, right? There are a bunch
of competing hypotheses, but
this is a really tough question.
And so going further back than
that, there is so much
uncertainty. That doesn't stop people.
You will very often, and this is a
weird thing, but every so often, linguists
will get email from just random people
in the world saying, hey,
I've come up with a new theory that's going
to unite Basque, and it's always
there's always something with, like, Basque.
Like, oh, we're going to unite Basque
and Korean and Japanese
and then all of those things together
combine to be this proto-
blah, blah, blah, blah. And then that
combined with proto-Indo-European
then becomes proto-blah, blah, blah, and it's always
named after them at the top. So then that
brings us eventually to proto-world,
which I believe started in
and then whatever zip code they're
in, right? There is
always the craziness out there, but
as far as kind of the linguistic
world that we populate,
it just, it's not a
thing. We acknowledge that there
might have been a proto-world language, but
it's so far back that we can't understand
it yet. Give me a time machine, yes.
Yes. Yes, I will find out
about proto-world, but without that
we don't know. So to wrap up,
there are a bunch of key points here.
Language versus dialect is very
often a political or social choice, rather
than a linguistic one. The dialects of
a mother language that grow apart become
daughter languages. This begets language
families, and we find these relations by
looking for sound correspondences, by
finding shared features, and by doing
reconstruction, and we can't
always find relatives for all languages.
Thank you very much.
