Hi everybody, I'm Will Styler and today we're going to talk about what it is that we're
going to cover in Linguistics 101 this quarter.
So today's plan for you is to start off by talking about introductions, just to introduce
myself.
Then we'll talk about what the course is about, how we're going to teach it, and what linguistics
is as a whole and why we care.
That's today's goal, is to figure out what is this thing that we're going to be doing
and why on earth would anybody do it.
And so, yeah, there's today's goal.
Introductions.
I'm Will Styler.
I look a lot like that guy, actually.
But basically, I am a linguist.
I'm an assistant teaching professor here in the linguistics department and my biggest
passion is language and more specifically, speech.
I'm interested in what it is that you're doing as you're talking.
I'm interested more even so in how it is that other people are able to turn the acoustic
signal you're generating that this microphone is capturing right now back into some understanding
of what I did inside my mouth.
And thus, when I say the word penguin, you know what that was.
That to me is really fascinating.
I also have some background in computational linguistics.
I've done a fair amount of work with natural language processing and I teach classes ranging
from phonology, morphology, probably phonetics at some point, also Ling 6, language in computers,
and then linguistics of memes is coming up here shortly, as well as a hearing science
class.
I have a lot of fun here.
But yeah, I'm Will Styler.
I'm a linguist.
I'm a gigantic nerd.
And in fact, we have an entire amazing instructional team, all of whom are linguists of various
levels in their career, but, and they haven't fully been assigned at this point in the recording,
but still we are all linguists.
The folks on the instructional team are linguists.
This is another way to say a gigantic professional language nerd.
We are nerds about one very specific thing and that is language.
We are interested in talking about language and thinking about language and I'm not meaning,
by the way, what we're going to be repeatedly discussing, the difference between lowercase
language and uppercase language.
Uppercase language means language, all of them.
The concept, this thing that I'm doing right now to you is language, generally speaking,
versus a lowercase language like Spanish or Russian or English or Malayalam.
There are lots of languages out there, but we're thinking about language, capital L language.
And so we're going to learn how it is that linguists talk about language.
We'll talk about what language is, generally speaking.
How do we define it?
How is it different from other things that humans do?
We'll talk about different aspects of language.
What exactly, how can we break language down into smaller, analyzable chunks?
We'll think about the different subfields that tackle different problems.
I'm a speech guy.
So fundamentally, that's where I spend a lot of my time.
But I have colleagues who spend all of their time thinking about words and word boundaries
or who think about sentences and sentence structures.
All of these subfields have different fun problems for us to think about.
We'll talk about different tools and techniques that linguists use during the course of the
quarter and then we'll look at actual language data over and over and over again.
Every synchronous session, by and large, we'll be thinking about language data, whether we're
generating it or getting it from elsewhere or looking at an existing data set, we're
going to be looking at language.
We're going to be picking it apart and trying to get a good sense of what's going on.
So that's kind of our main goal for Ling 101 and we'll also have a lot of fun, for certain
values of fun, in the process.
I'm going to have fun and I'm sure you all will too.
So that's what the course is about.
How are we going to teach it?
Well, we're going to be online, as you can probably tell, given that we're online.
That means we're going to use online videos like this one, wow, as well as offline assignments
as well as these synchronous work sessions.
And we're going to be doing some one-on-one questioning and answering.
There should be an and in there someplace, don't worry about that.
But you understood it, magic language.
Anyways, so we're going to be doing all of those things together to try and get all of
this information to you.
This is an instructional video, wow, amazing, I know you're shocked.
But the slides for this video are posted on the syllabus.
If you go to the syllabus and click on the name of this video, you can get a link to
exactly the slides you're looking at here.
And you can also use YouTube to speed me up, slow me down, or to get captioning using YouTube.
And the captioning from YouTube is fascinating.
We talk more in link six about why that's such a hard problem, right?
But these instructional videos are here for your help.
You can also get to them by a canvas, but it's mostly me talking.
But you'll also see things that look like this.
These are check-in questions.
A check-in question is where you have a set of answers.
And when I give you something like this, your idea, the goal here is for you to take a look
at it.
For you to look over at these things and pause, maybe even pause the video, but take a second
and figure out the right answer.
So I'm going to give you a moment here, and I'm going to drink some tea.
And I'm going to spill some tea down the front of me.
Wow, one lecture in and I'm already really, yeah, anyways, look at the question.
So I hope that you figured out by this point in time that the answer is, in fact, D. The
correct answer here is D, because I told you that.
Wow, they're not all going to be that easy.
So let's use a different question, this one based on the syllabus.
When should you tell me about special accommodations you're going to need, whether due to religious
holidays, whether due to Office of Student Disabilities, or whether due to time zone
issues or things like that?
So A, within the first two weeks, B, end of the quarter, C, when I'm freaking out about
my grade, and D, I won't tell him.
The answer to this, if you've read the syllabus, or frankly if you're a sane human being, is
going to be A, within the first two weeks.
So this is how this works.
One thing to highlight, though, is that listening to these videos isn't magic.
I mean, language is magic, and therefore the videos will take on a little bit of character
of magic, but it's not itself magical.
You're going to want to take notes.
Likely, there are people in the world who don't need to take notes, but it's probably
a good idea to at least try it.
But remember not to write down word for word what I'm saying.
Write down the ideas.
I'm saying this, and a lot of you have figured this out already, but reconceptualizing what
I'm saying is a really useful tool for this.
And summarize things in your own words.
You have the joy right now of having videos, which means you can pause the video if you
need to take a little bit longer time to write down some notes.
You can look at the slides later on.
Everything is still available to you.
So take notes well, summarize, rethink, and that'll make life easier.
Also, I really encourage you to write down questions that you have, because we'll have
not only the question and answer session during the week, but you'll have office hours, and
at the start of each session, we'll take a little bit of time for questioning.
Write those questions down, because chances are if you have a question, a bunch of your
classmates have the same question.
So I'd like to answer it.
So yeah, and then cross them out if you later realize I've answered them in the lecture,
but yeah, there you go, and post them on Canvas if you just can't sleep, if you're sitting
there like, oh my God, what exactly is the difference between dialect and idiolect?
You'll get that later on, and if you can't figure those two things out, okay, anyways,
we'll cross that bridge when we come to it.
But Canvas is another place to get questions answered.
So the other thing to remember is that we as a species are really, really awful at multitasking.
That's right.
Close Discord.
I know there are a billion distractions out in the world.
That's a thing.
Seriously, but just don't, resist the temptation, no, do resist the temptation, prosody there.
Resist the temptation.
You know, the more time that you can spend with some degree of focus on these videos,
the better, and because this is where you're going to be getting a lot of the course content
rather than the course analysis and skills, it's really important that you focus here,
or study it again later, but it's more time efficient just to do it right the first time.
So I'm going to write any questions here, and when I do that, what I want you to do
is to think.
Stop.
Hmm.
Do I have any questions?
If so, write them down.
That's all.
Okay.
So this brings us to our main topic here.
What is linguistics?
Why are we doing this?
Why am I a thing?
It's a long story right there, but most people, the thing is, have zero clue.
If I walk up to somebody and I say, hi, I'm a linguist, they're going to first go, hmm,
I think I've heard of one of you at some point in time in the past.
Oh, I watched Arrival.
So you talk to aliens, or the most likely answer is, how many languages do you speak?
This is sort of a running joke among linguists.
You can go to the LSA and see somebody wearing a how many languages do you speak t-shirt,
just because it's kind of, it's the thing, and it makes sense, right?
But it's not exactly accurate, because many linguists speak more than one language.
I speak a couple myself, but there is way more to linguistics than knowing languages.
I know monolingual linguists who are absolutely amazing as linguists, who do great work, who
know the field well and are excellent, but just happen to have only picked up the one
they started with, right?
Because linguists are not studying many, many languages.
There are polyglots in the world.
There are translators who can go from four different languages back and forth fluently.
This is an amazing set of skills.
It's one that I value and respect incredibly.
But linguists do a different thing.
We are studying capital L language.
We are studying how language as a concept works.
All of these different things, whether it's Spanish, whether it's Russian, whether it's
Malayalam, whether it's some other language, you know, all of these things, Gua, for instance,
all of these languages have some things in common, right?
And sign languages as well.
All of them have things in common.
What are those things?
And so we can study this by looking at Spanish, Laotian, Russian, Kumeyaay, or any other variety
of interesting languages.
Learning languages can be a big part of that.
And absolutely, as a linguist, learning more languages is a good thing because you get
a better sense of how things work and with different parts, different arrays.
But that's not the whole thing because we're interested again in capital L language.
We are interested in the concept even as we study individual languages and how things
work there.
But the problem is we've got a problem as linguists because language is amazingly complex.
It's both a problem and it's job security.
I'll take both, right?
Let's look at a sentence like this.
The duck quacked gleefully at his bay.
So putting aside the fact that I think bay is now old vocabulary, I'm trying over here,
right?
What are the different elements of this?
We can think about this in so many different ways.
If I say the duck quacked gleefully at his bay, what did I do there?
How did I make that sequence of sounds?
What did I do with my mouth, with my lips?
The duck quacked gleefully.
So you can think about what it is that my tongue is doing.
Why is it that the qu, qu, involves this lift gesture here?
Interesting, right?
You can think about it in terms of my world.
How did you understand the acoustic signal that this microphone is capturing that is
going into your ears and is allowing you to understand that that sentence was made?
Why is there a T at the end of quacked rather than a D?
There's a D up there.
Why is it not a T?
Why is it, or I'm sorry, why is it not quacked, quacked?
For that matter, why is it not quacked?
Probably was at some point.
English changes, right?
But why is there a T there, quacked?
That's an interesting question in phonology.
What does that D actually mean?
What's the difference between the duck quacked gleefully and the duck quack gleefully?
Why do we use one rather than the other in this dialect of English?
Then we might ask ourselves bigger structural questions, like who quacked at whom?
We know that there was quacking involved, but who did it?
When did this happen?
Did it happen now?
Is it in the future?
How do we even know this?
What was gleeful about it?
Was the quacking gleeful?
Was the duck gleeful?
Was the bay gleeful?
Gleeful, wow, interesting.
Gleeful?
I don't know.
That's interesting.
Why did I substitute an L for a W right there?
Another good question.
Whose bay was it?
How do we know that the bay belonged to the duck rather than to the quacking, to the gleefulness,
or somebody else's bay?
Or maybe the bay was somebody else's bay.
We don't know that.
And what is a bay anyways?
What does that mean?
Why would you even use that word?
Why would you put this old slang in a Ling 101 presentation?
There are so many questions we can ask ourselves.
And then we can get into our understanding that we can glean from the world.
For instance, is this duck single?
Probably.
Maybe.
Probably not.
If he's got a bay, then presumably, if it's actually his bay, not single anymore.
Is the duck happy?
Well, if they're quacking gleefully, probably.
So anyways, you have all sorts of questions you can ask for this.
And can a duck have a bay?
Probably.
Right?
I don't know.
But either way, this gets at the idea that language is complex.
Every element of analysis I just talked about has a lot of complexity in it, right?
And so thinking about even a simple sentence like that adds, well, a bunch of more complexity
there.
So because language is complex, linguistics has to be complex as well.
And so we're going to look at all of the complexities.
That is the biggest oversimplification ever, because we're not going to look at all of
them, but we're going to look at a bunch of them from a very high level.
If you look at any one of these subfields, if you look at any one of these areas, there
are entire graduate courses possible.
But we're going to look at the different levels of complexity that we deal with.
So we're going to look at many of the central subfields of linguistics.
We're also going to ask other questions that we as linguists are also really interested
in.
So what elements of linguistics are we going to cover this quarter?
Well, how does talking work?
What is it that I'm doing right now with my mouth and lips that's creating a set of sounds
that you're hearing?
Phonetics.
How do sounds change when we combine them together?
Why is it quacked rather than quacked?
That's phonology.
We'll talk about how we build words in language, and that's morphology.
What is the shape of words?
What do they sound like?
We'll talk about how we combine words into sentences, syntax.
We'll talk about what all of this means together, semantics, pragmatics.
And then we will cover some other little things off to the side, but our main goal is going
to be to cover all of these big subfields here, because you're going to be taking more
and more classes in these subfields when you declare your linguistics major.
So what won't we be covering this quarter?
Well, a couple of big important things to start with.
One of the things that a lot of people always get this kind of weirded out about is, if
I say, oh, I'm a linguist, they'll immediately stop and go, oh, I'm sorry, why?
Because my grammar is terrible, I'm not really articulate.
And this is a big oof moment for me, because that's not at all what we do in linguistics.
We'll talk about this over and over again, but the goal of this class is to help you
understand how language actually works for actual humans, rather than worrying about,
you know, oh, what is good language?
What is articulate?
What is grammar?
And we'll talk more about this a little bit later on.
How does poetry work?
We're not going to get into aesthetics of language.
I mean, certainly, you'll learn things that'll help you understand how rhyme works.
It'll help you as a poet to know more about language and linguistics, but we're not going
to engage directly with the aesthetics of language.
What makes a great author great is a different question.
That's the literature department.
We're interested in what makes a great author understandable.
What are they doing?
We're not going to get into directly learning new languages.
Certainly, knowing more about linguistics helps you know more about languages.
It helps you learn languages more quickly, because you're going to be able to understand,
oh, this is a case system.
I learned about that in 101.
Or oh, wow, so the syntax is just backwards.
And so we'll understand these kinds of things, relative, of course, backwards, relative to
another language.
But nonetheless, it'll help you, but we're not going to get directly into learning languages.
We're not going to talk about how to be a translator.
I will talk about translation theory, because oh my God, translation theory is amazing.
But we're not going to talk about the physical act of translation or anything like that.
And we're not going to talk about individual languages as much.
I will be using examples over and over again from languages of the world.
And for me, it's probably going to be Spanish or Russian, because those were in many ways
my first love.
But I'm going to try and use a diversity of examples wherever I can.
So we'll talk about individual languages from time to time, but this class will not be about
Spanish linguistics.
It will not be about Russian linguistics or Kumeyaay linguistics or anything like that.
This is a class that is about language generally.
So that's what we're doing here.
This gives you a sense of linguistics, gives you a sense of what we're up to, but the bigger
question remains, why?
Why does anyone care about linguistics, Will?
And of course, it's, you know, who asks these kinds of crazy things?
But at least there are a bunch of ways to answer it.
Just in case you have to explain to your parents why you've declared this new major, we'll
help you out here.
Every linguist ends up having their own reason.
For me, personally, I can't not be a linguist.
I'm broken in a very creative way, such that these questions make a lot of sense to me.
And I can't not ask them.
I can't not investigate speech perception, because if I try and avoid it, I'll be at
a restaurant or something, and the waiter will come up, and I'll just be like, oh, wow,
you have a really interesting voice quality, and I don't say this part, you have a really
interesting voice quality, and I'm very, very curious about why that works.
So I'm a linguist.
I'm born to it.
And you'll have your own, but you might not know that yet.
When I started my school, at college, that is, I didn't think I was a linguist yet.
I found my own reasons, and you'll find your own reasons when you become a linguist.
But I'll give you two big answers as to why linguistics is amazing.
And the first is that linguists do linguists interesting.
Linguists, but linguistics.
Ah, pronunciation.
We do interesting things, and the other thing is that language is awesome.
It really, really is.
So let's start with the interesting things part of it.
So experimental work in linguistics is a really big thing.
A lot of folks don't really think about that initially, especially folks coming from outside
of the social sciences might not even think about experimental work being a possibility
when you're doing this kind of thing.
But it's definitely a thing.
So observe, this is a nerd right here in his natural habitat using what's called an oral
nasal airflow mask.
This is a mask that has sort of a cup that you put over your mouth, then there's a divider
in the middle of the cup such that when you put this over your nose and mouth, there is
a divider that gives me the air that's coming out of your nose so I can measure its pressure
and the air coming out of your mouth so you can measure its pressure.
This gives you a really detailed and fine grained knowledge of air coming out of the
mouth versus nose.
You might be thinking, why does anyone care?
Nasality, vowel nasality, consonant nasality.
Nasals are sounds like bend, mm, mm, or mom, or in French, beau versus bon, on.
That's a nasal vowel.
So we can use experimental methods to measure nasality, as this nerd right here is doing
way back when.
Or electromagnetic articulography.
This is another nerd in his natural habitat under an electromagnetic articulography machine.
This is a machine that uses magnetic coils up here in these arms that you're seeing around
the head.
And those magnetic coils transmit a very subtle magnetic field, and that magnetic field is
picked up by little tiny sensors.
This is to scale.
That is the sensor down at the bottom there.
That is a very, very small sensor.
And then what we do is we glue those sensors to you.
Using super glue, we just super glue sensor here, sensor here, sensor here, all up and
along down your tongue, along your jaw, even your eyebrows, so we can get a sense of what
does it mean when your eyebrows are moving?
And so we use this to track the position of things in space, and by doing this, we get
really detailed information about how exactly it is that the mouth and tongue and whatnot
are moving as we're going through the world.
So that's really fun.
This is one of the things I did in my postdoc.
This is my postdoc advisor, Pam Baddour, with an ultrasound machine.
And this is just literally an ultrasound machine.
May have had one already for medical purposes.
But what it allows us to do is to, well, it bounces sound waves up, and then when they
hit air, for instance, at the top of your tongue, they bounce back.
And so you can see a slice through the mouth.
And so let's take a look at a video here recorded at Michigan.
And what we're going to see here is right in this area is the tongue.
This moving line here is the tongue, and the tip of the tongue is this direction, the root
of the tongue is back that way.
The north wind and the sun were disputing which was the stronger.
When a traveler came along wrapped in a warm cloak, they agreed that the one who first
succeeded in making the traveler take his cloak off...
So if we pay attention, you can see that different sounds trigger different movements
of that tongue.
...as hard as he could.
But the more he blew, the more closely did the traveler fold his cloak around him.
You see it moving fluidly.
And at last the north wind gave up the attempt.
All the gestures blend together.
Then the sun shined out warmly, and immediately the traveler took off his cloak.
And so the...
This is amazingly useful for us.
As we study speech, being able to see the tongue moving in real time and in full detail
rather than just having a few sensors, as I talked about with Emma, being able to see
that moving in full detail is absolutely amazing.
It gives us great information about how it is that our speech actually works over time.
Really, really cool stuff.
So all of those are fun instrumental methods for measuring speech, but there are other
things that you can do too.
Just good old-fashioned acoustics.
A lot of my work happens with just a microphone, like this one, although usually it's one that
we mount to the front of the face like this, so it's a little bit more like the Britney
Spears style.
But anyways, I dug...
That's an old reference.
Wow.
Aging.
Anyways, acoustics is another thing we use.
We just measure the sound.
And we can look at the sound using fancier techniques, and you'll learn more about these
in Ling 112 or in Ling 6.
This is a spectrogram showing us the different frequency components of the sound as it moves
through over time.
And so you can see, this is the word noise here, that each one of those different bands
corresponds to different parts of the word there.
I'm not going to go into it right now, even though I really, desperately, truly want to,
because this is 101, but still, acoustics gives us a lot of really great information.
There's also eye tracking, is another really interesting element, where we use actually
a setup not that different from the one I'm using right now, except we have a very specialized
camera that's looking back at me, looking back at my eyes, and trying to get a sense
of where on the screen I'm looking at any given moment.
So it can follow, using a cursor, my gaze.
So as I'm looking around, and it's very jagged, you can tell exactly where I'm looking.
This is useful because we can then get very, very quick information.
For instance, for a speech perception experiment, because if I say, you know, press a button,
here or here, when you hear the word you think you've heard, like it'll give you bend bed
or something like that, there's a big delay, because I have to move my arm, I have to think
about the gesture to move my arm, et cetera.
With eyes, we're real quick to move them.
So watch this trial.
This is an example of an eye tracking trial for speech perception.
Look at the pictures.
Pink cursor is the eye gaze.
Fixate cross.
Now, look at send.
So in this case, we can see the exact moment, and I'll replay it again in a second, where
the person made the decision, I'm hearing the word send on this side, rather than the
word said on this side.
Really, really cool.
One more time.
Look at the pictures.
Fixate cross.
Now, look at send.
See how quick that decision was?
That's really, really, really useful.
So eye tracking is really helpful in phonetics, but also in other parts of psycholinguistic
work.
Dr. Wittenberg in our department has an eye tracker and uses it to great effect.
Neurolinguistics is another element of the world that is really fascinating, because
there are all kinds of different tools that we can use to measure what's going on in the
brain, ranging from EEG, fMRI, MEG, all sorts of really cool techniques that can give us
some sense of what might be going on inside our heads, and then correlate those to various
linguistic measures.
And they're really, really cool.
We can get so much interesting data and start to get a sense of not just what it is that
we're doing behaviorally when we deal with language, but how we're processing it inside
of our brains.
There are other fun things that you can do as a linguist, though, that aren't just experimental.
I'm an experimentalist, right?
But there are lots of elements of our language, or of our language, but also of our field.
Documentation is one of them.
So there are many, many, many, many, many languages in the world.
We'll talk more about exactly how many there are later on, but there are a ton of languages.
And even in the US, certainly before colonialism happened, there were many, many, many languages,
and there remain many great indigenous languages out there.
Language documentation is when a linguist goes to an area and actually does work, right?
They work with a community.
They talk to teachers of that language in the community, or they talk to speakers of
the language if no one's teaching it.
And very often they'll call them teachers anyways because they are teaching us the language.
And then we will try and get a sense of what's going on in that language.
We'll work with members of the community to understand exactly where the language and
the culture relate to each other.
We'll talk to the members of the community about how they, and if they, would like to
rebuild their language, to revitalize it, to rebuild in cases where it's been completely
lost.
But still, basically trying to find a way to collaborate with members of the community
to bring a language that might be in danger of fading out into more regular use, if that's
what members of the community want, and at the very least to describe the language so
we know more about human language by virtue of knowing more about this specific language.
And we have a very strong department here at UCSD working in field linguistics.
We have several different faculty members as well as a bunch of different graduate students
who all work with languages around the world.
We have people working on Somali, we have people working on the Inuit languages, people
working on languages of South Africa, South America, that is, people working in languages
of West Africa, as well as East Africa for that matter.
We've got a lot of documentation going on, as well as people working on languages of
San Diego.
Because remember, English is not San Diego's native language, at least it sure wasn't.
In fact, languages like Kumeyaay and Cahuilla were spoken in this area.
Kumeyaay is the predominant in this particular region.
But still, this is something that is really important for us to do as a field and provides
us with a lot of richness for our understanding.
The one place that everyone has seen language documentation now is the movie Arrival.
Linguists feel many things, many complicated things about Arrival, by and large.
A, it's probably the last time we're ever going to get a linguist in a mainstream movie,
which hey, good, good, we'll take it, right?
There were elements of it, the whole language influencing thought thing, we'll get into
next time.
But what they showed was a massively accelerated version of exactly language documentation.
Doing in three days what would have taken two years, certainly an impressive linguist.
But still, that's language documentation, just in sort of a different way.
Computational linguistics is my other love, and this involves lots of questions, namely
like if I am talking to Siri, okay good, she didn't wake up.
If I'm talking to Siri, what, how does that work?
How do any, oh damn it, she woke up.
No, sorry Siri, go away.
I'm sorry.
No, you don't need to apologize, okay, I'm sorry.
I have way too many of these devices around because I teach them.
Anyways, how does this work?
How does Siri understand these kinds of things that we're doing on a regular basis?
When I say those magical words that wake those devices up, because I have Google, Alexa,
and Siri staring at me right now, waiting, just waiting.
How does that work?
How do they evaluate the query, et cetera?
So we get into that kind of thing.
And how do you deal with questions like this?
This one has been fixed, by the way, but this is a danger for computational linguistics.
Why is this bad?
Well, Siri has had an ambiguity there, and we'll talk more about ambiguity later on,
but is this call in the sense of make a phone call, or is this call in the sense of address
somebody as?
And so this is a really cool little example, although it's also a little dangerous, but
of computational linguistics in a very applied sense.
But computational linguistics also works in other fields.
There are types of computational linguistics that have nothing to do with virtual assistants,
even though that's an area I love talking about, because it kind of gives you the whole
stack, right?
But automatic summarization.
Imagine you've got a very, very long news article.
How do you get the gist of it very quickly?
Information extraction.
I have 50 boxes of medical documents.
I need to go through there and find the one that talks about this particular disease.
In that case, or even worse, I need to find all of the ones where this disease happened
within six months after taking this medication.
This is a kind of information extraction, trying to pull data out of other data.
Ad targeting is 100% a thing, and linguists are involved in this, in some ways more and
in some ways less than they should be.
But nonetheless, ad targeting is definitely another area where computational linguists
are useful.
Because if somebody keeps talking about a certain area of life, for instance, if somebody
keeps talking about watches, then you might want to give them watch ads.
But that might be the case even if they talk about other related terms, like horology,
the science of watches, or escapement.
You need to have kind of a cluster of ideas of what should trigger the right kinds of
ads.
Sentiment analysis is really interesting.
Trying to read, for instance, a review and figure out how somebody felt about it.
Trying to read a larger long-form review of a movie and figure out, okay, what did they
actually feel about this?
Or maybe reading a newspaper article and seeing how the author of the article felt about the
thing being discussed.
Also, pattern recognition, just generally speaking, is a thing over and over again in
computational linguistics.
And this can be useful to a bunch of different people.
Concept mention, detection, all of these things fit together.
One of the biggest areas where this is useful or used right now, certainly in the U.S.,
is by the three-letter agencies, so to speak.
They, for instance, will have a vested interest in...
So imagine for just a second that you were going to sell something very, very illegal.
Something that, you know, these kinds of folks might be interested in, well, asking
you about.
You probably wouldn't just come out, right, and say, hey, I would like to sell you this
highly illegal material.
Okay, what is your pricing?
That would be a really dumb sort of thing to do.
Instead, you'd probably code your language.
Hey, I have a package for you.
Oh, really?
What would it cost for me to pick it up?
You've done the same thing there, but you're not using the same words.
So folks like the NSA, like the CIA, folks like all kinds of other agencies, are really
interested in trying to get a sense of what people are talking about, even when they're
trying to talk in code, and also just trying to read a whole bunch of material, in many
cases a lot of material, to figure out where, if anywhere, these kinds of things are.
The ethics, the questions about this kind of thing for a society, are sort of a separate
question entirely, but this is another area where a lot of linguists work.
Forensic linguistics is a different thing, but a really cool one.
Forensic linguistics is sort of the intersection of linguistics and the criminal justice system,
or the legal system, but also in very close analysis for a specific reason.
For instance, emergency call analysis, trying to get a sense of what was said in emergency
calls that aren't clear, trying to get a sense of how scared somebody was, because there
are lots of things.
By the way, a couple of content warnings, there's going to be some mention of crime
and violence and things like that.
Authorship attribution is a really useful thing.
This is useful outside of a criminal context.
This answers questions like, so often, somebody says, oh my god, Shakespeare didn't write
Shakespeare.
Authorship attribution is the way that we figure these things out.
By looking for similarities in writing style across different authors, we can get a better
sense of what's going on there.
You also get things like, and this can be useful also for social media.
If you have a tweet that was written by a major celebrity or something like that that's
really controversial, they might say, oh, well, my intern wrote that instead.
Authorship attribution can give you a sense of how similar it was to prior tweets.
Ransom notes is another big one.
If somebody writes a ransom note, is it very similar to how they normally talk?
Also suicide letters, unfortunately, is another area where authorship attribution is major,
versus, well, a suicide letter that somebody else wrote probably isn't actually a suicide.
All of these things are really important in forensics.
You also get things like voice identification.
Back in the day, so to speak, when Osama bin Laden was still alive, one of the biggest
questions that always happened any time there was a brand new bin Laden tape released, a
tape released to the press from Osama, everybody would always ask, oh my god, is it actually
him?
This is the kind of folks, this is the work that you do there.
Getting a sense of what his language sounded like, just from the physical element of, like,
what did his vocal tract look like?
Did this, is this sort of a set of sound signals that is plausible for this human?
But also what kinds of language patterns he used, that kind of thing.
All of those things for voice are really useful.
And this also gets into questions like voice print ID.
Sooner or later, somebody is going to try and sell you voice print ID as a secure way
to get into X, Y, or Z.
Absolutely not.
Nope, no, no, no, nope, nope, nope, nope.
If your bank offers voice print identification, they're selling you a cute little lie.
Anyways, and so voice identification is yet another area in forensic linguistics that's
important.
Then trademarks, actually, is another really common area that linguists get called in.
For instance, this could happen if, I don't even know why, Swiffer is a, Swiffer was actually,
it was a term that was generated by linguists.
The sweeping little mop thing that you could find at the grocery store, when they tried
to come up with a name for that, they wanted something that was useful, like er, that had
that er, I do things suffix, that was swift and fast, and it was sweepy as well, and it
was swift.
You know, look, somebody was paid a lot of money for the word Swiffer.
But imagine then that another company comes along and offers the Swaffer.
How similar is that?
Is that similar enough that you can sue them?
This comes up a lot, actually.
I just got, like, three or four days before filming this video, an email from somebody
asking me if I, you know, if I knew enough about, actually, in this case, it was the
medical marijuana industry, to help talk about similarity of vocabulary in a trademark case
or something.
No, I don't, but nonetheless, a lot of folks need linguists for this.
One of the biggest areas where forensic linguistics came up was actually in the Exxon Valdez disaster.
This was a case, a famous case, of a ship running aground, an oil tanker, running aground
off the coast of Alaska.
And it was negligently so.
The person, the captain of the ship, should not have run aground there.
That was a really bad idea.
And there were big questions as to whether the captain of the ship was drunk at the time
that he was driving the ship.
And this has massive consequences, both criminal, for the captain himself, as well as for the
insurance company.
And so there was a bunch of research done, and it had the awkwardness of no one was able
to get onto the ship for about six hours after the disaster.
So all that they had were recordings of the radio calls made by the captain of the ship.
And so the question was, can we determine whether this person is drunk or not based
on these recordings?
So this spawned a whole area of research into the linguistics of intoxication, which is
kind of fascinating.
I mentioned advertising and branding.
The Swiffer thing already is huge.
This is an area that you can actually get paid pretty well as a linguist, but it's a
rare area.
Lexicography.
I know several lexicographers.
The idea here is to study words, not necessarily how they're made or how they're broken
up, but where they come about, to trace them down.
These are folks like the Oxford English Dictionary.
The OED is available to you free with your campus, on campus or with the campus VPN.
You can get into the unabridged OED.
And what this means is you can find the origin with high confidence in any word.
Just like period, any word is now available to you.
You can go through and find the very first use of the word nerd, circa 1950, which is
kind of amazing, or at least the first one in literature, of course.
But lexicographers are the kinds of folks who will hunt these kinds of things down.
And so you use that link to get to the OED.
And again, you can get to the links through the slides on Canvas, or I'm sorry, on the
syllabus.
So linguists, we do awesome things, I mean, clearly.
But the best reason to care about linguistics is that, well, language is awesome.
Like I've been talking about fun things that linguists do, but at the end of the day, the
thing itself is so cool.
Oh my God.
And so what I'd like to do for you right now is to give you a sampling platter of some
of the awesomeness of language.
So one of the ways that languages differ is in the sounds that they use.
So in English, for instance, we actually have a pretty good variety of consonants and vowels
and other kinds of sounds.
But other languages around the world have other sounds.
And so for instance, there are a whole host of sounds that English doesn't use.
So for instance, clicks, bilabial click, up, up, up.
And in some cases, up, you can have different ways to do that.
You can have dental clicks, post-alveolar, up, up.
And lateral clicks, like you would call a horse.
So all of those are sounds that English doesn't have.
And by the way, not all African languages have clicks either.
We'll talk about that later on, but don't run down that road too quickly.
Implosives are a sound that English doesn't really use either, a ba, ba, ba, ba, ba.
By the way, you do have an implosive.
This uvular implosive here at the bottom.
That's right.
We can all make that sound.
We just generally don't.
And it's not a part of our language, although it is a part of other languages.
And then adjectives.
A ba.
I'm sorry.
I screwed that up.
Up, up, up, up, up.
A ba, a, a, a.
A pa, the bilabial.
A pa, dental.
A ca, velar.
A ca, alveolar.
Implosives are, I'm sorry, adjectives are actually relatively common around the world,
but English doesn't have them.
One place where they did show up is actually in the movie Avatar, where I believe one of
the characters was named Duc Te, or something along those lines.
So implosives showed up there.
I'm sorry, adjectives showed up there.
Which is kind of interesting.
They also showed up in Lakota, which by the way is very similar to the language that was
used in Avatar in terms of its sound structure, which is funny because Avatar is basically
dancing with wolves and dancing with wolves was about Lakota.
Anyways, I digress.
Um, the, yeah, so there's that.
Mandarin Chinese.
Oh, this is so much fun.
Mandarin Chinese has fricatives that are just amazing.
So I'm going to play for you a Mandarin tongue twister.
西十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十
四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十
Here's the same thing from another person.
西十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十四十
十四不是十四,十四不是十四
Yeah.
That's awesome.
Mandarin has this incredible set of fricatives that can be very difficult for English speakers
to hear apart but are very straightforward for Mandarin speakers, which is great.
And languages also differ not just in the sounds themselves, but in how they put those
sounds together.
So for instance, in English, we have really long words.
Words like strengths is a single syllable, that is the longest single syllable word in
English.
So if you're ever out at a bar or something and somebody says, hey, what's the longest
single syllable word in English?
You got them now.
By the way, that was a lateral click.
So strengths is a very, very long word.
But then you also get other languages that go even longer, that have longer consonant
clusters.
So the word glance in Russian is vzgliat, vzgliat.
And by the way, my apologies for Russian mispronunciations.
It's been many years.
It's starting to fall off at this point.
Straitelstv, meaning of construction.
Here you get this elstv thing, lstv, is something that English speakers are not generally prepared
for.
So Russian can do us one better in terms of consonant clusters.
And then in the Czech language, you don't actually need, although in English too, but
there are words that don't actually have a vowel in them.
In Czech, you can make an entire sentence.
Sadly, that sentence is stick your finger down your throat.
But unfortunately, in Czech, you can say, strcht, prst, skrskrk, strcht, prst, skrskrk.
Stick your finger down your throat, and there you go.
So thanks, Czech.
But that's really cool, right?
This is an entire sentence that doesn't have any vowels, which is great.
One other thing that this means is that roosters say different things in different languages.
There is, in fact, an entire page on rooster dialectology that you can check out there
that talks about the fact that every language writes down and even says what a rooster says
differently, which is weird.
I mean, we have cock-a-doodle-doo, really?
I don't...
Yeah, no.
Anyways, so roosters say different things in different languages, which is odd.
Languages also differ in how they work with words.
English tends to have words that are made of monolithic chunks, like three.
You can't break three apart into separate areas, or the doesn't come apart into separate
chunks.
But cats does.
You have two chunks there.
Or robbed has the two chunks, rob and id.
Shopping is shop plus ing, right?
Two chunks.
But other languages, yeah, they have more chunks.
Here's an example of Wichita.
I cannot pronounce this word.
I would not be doing the language justice, so I'm not going to bother.
But this means until there was just a little trickle of water left.
It's two words, but yeah.
Or there was the big buffalo lying there.
This is a single word in Wichita.
We're going to hopefully have a recorded lecture from somebody who specializes in this field
later on in the quarter, but this is really, really amazing, in the field that is of exceptionally
long words, and languages that are what are called polysynthetic, that string a bunch
of things together, but this is really awesome.
And it should surprise any buffaloes in your life.
Get it?
The big buffalo?
Surprised?
No?
Yeah, I know.
That's not an American bison, but still, okay, true.
I'm trying over here, right?
So okay.
Another thing that's important is that languages have unique terms and structures in which
they can discuss the world, right?
So in Finnish, there is this word.
If we have any Finnish people in the audience, you will immediately understand, oh wow, yeah,
this is fun.
There is an entire Wikipedia page on the word sisu that is absolutely amazing, and I highly
encourage you, you just go ahead and do it, because it is not, it's one of those things
that's probably not a word, but a whole culture, right?
This language, Yamana here, has this word, which means roughly this, a look shared by
two people, each wishing that the other will offer something that they both desire, but
are unwilling to suggest or offer it for themselves.
Another way to put this is, this is my wife and I looking at each other across the dinner
table and saying, but not saying, I really want to go for churros and ice cream.
We're both feeling that, but it's not quite, we both, yeah, so anyways, that's a nice example
of this.
Unfortunately, the language, this language has one speaker left, and she's 85, and that's
as of a couple of years ago.
So this is why language documentation is important.
This is a really cool concept.
This is a thing that we don't generally have in English, and boy, it would be nice if we
had it, right?
And if we have more knowledge of the world, we have things like this.
Turkish actually has a really cool example of this, and pardon my Turkish, but by switching
these two things out, by changing from the D to the Mish here, you end up with the difference
between saying, oh yeah, he came to the party, or saying, he came to the best of my knowledge.
I wasn't there, but I'm pretty sure that he came.
This is what's called an evidential marker.
So in Turkish, it is obligatory to say, when you make any statement, yes, I saw it, I know
this, or I'm pretty sure, to the best of my knowledge, it's true, but I don't really think
so.
This is huge, right?
I mean, imagine what this would do for language to just know at any given moment the exact
provenance of knowledge alongside knowing the knowledge itself.
That's really cool.
So linguists study all language, though, and that's one thing that's worth noting here.
I mean, we've talked about different languages around the world, but I want to, again, reinforce
to you all that linguists are interested in every bit of language in the world, not just
the proper language, not just the language that's in the Oxford English Dictionary.
We are interested in language, however it is used, by whoever's using it, and we acknowledge
that there are different groups of people who use language differently.
So for instance, new language, words that are relatively new have studyable meaning,
too.
For instance, one common word that a lot of kids are using today is the word lit.
So for instance, you could say, Jen lit the party when she arrived.
See, that's great.
Or for instance, yeet is another common piece of new language.
So this would be something like, oh my god, that movie was so yeet.
Or for instance, to spill tea is another common one here, which means you could say something
like Matt has a lot of spilled tea and sadness in his life.
Oowoo, of course, you could say I am completely oowoo about her.
And then simp is really commonly used right now.
That test was simp.
I was done in ten minutes.
So I know what you're all thinking, yeah, all of those things were wrong.
Now the reason I did that is not just to make you cringe, although I will freely admit,
yeah, I enjoy that too, it's sad, I can't see you as you cringe as I could in a normal
classroom setting.
But more importantly, there's a reason I'm making you all cringe.
You have intuitions about how those words should work, about what they should mean,
how they should be used.
And all of those words that I had on that last slide were used incorrectly.
So if you have an intuition about the correct use of words, that's language use, right?
That's language.
That means that the word yeet is not just some stupid thing that the kids say.
This is a valid and important part of language.
If you believe that I used it wrong, that means there's a right way to use it.
And if there's a right way to use it, there's a grammar.
And that means that yeet is useful, it's grammatically interesting.
And that's awesome, right?
So we can talk about any words, even brand new words, being grammatically used or not.
And we can know when any language we use, whether it's OED, quality language, whatever
that means, or not, we can talk about it being used properly.
And words can have legitimate and correct meanings, as well as incorrect ones, even
if they're not in the dictionary.
So we could try that again, and use the words in a sense that I believe they're actually
grammatical this time.
That in-class phonological analysis assignment was so lit.
Even if you don't believe that yet, and you'll get there, oh my God, you'll get there.
When you get that Russian data set, it's lit, I'm telling you guys.
But that's maybe a better usage of that.
Yeet, of course, is a verb, right?
Will is ready to yeet 2020 out the window.
I think we all are.
Or, you know, I yeeted the empty bottle down the hallway.
All of these things, the empty bottle was yachting down the hallway.
No?
Hmm?
Okay.
Either way.
Yeet is a verb, not an adjective there.
To spill tea is, again, it's verbal.
Will will not spill the tea on departmental drama.
No matter whether you ask or not, I will not.
Although I will actually spill tea in a very different sense down myself in the middle
of filming a video lecture.
Damn, I'm good.
Oo is not really an adjective, but an adjective, but an attitude, that is.
This is yet another one of those things that, um, it's kind of hard to describe exactly
what it is, but it's a thing.
We'll just put it that way.
And then, of course, a simp is something very different.
So you could say something like, don't be a simp, Chomsky will never cite your crazy
work, even if you mention him 500 times.
So simping has this entire different meaning.
It has a verbal form, too, which is entertaining.
Stop simping.
Anyways, so all of those words have legitimate and real meanings.
All of these things are parts of the reasons why we care.
Languages are very different in a bunch of different ways, in their sounds, in their
structures, in their words, and even language that is not necessarily a different language,
but is language that is used in the world.
All of that matters.
And all of that is different.
All of that is really fascinating.
But I have a secret goal for this course.
I have a secret desire for how this course is going to go and what's going to happen
to you all in the process here.
Language is amazing, but it's amazing at every different level.
One day, I'd like for you, my goal for this course is that you sit down, for instance,
in maybe an airport or someplace where you're just, you're bored.
You're not doing anything else, you know, between Instagrammings and so to speak.
That's not a verb.
God, I'm old.
I'm back at the ranch.
You sit down and you're listening to two people having a conversation.
Just listening to them chatting, going back and forth, back and forth.
And just for a moment, I want you to see language in the way that I do.
I want you to understand that right now, one of these two people is sitting there vibrating
bits of meat around inside their head as they are blowing out air.
This in turn is creating little tiny air pressure variations that are bouncing off of all the
structures in the room and bouncing off of your ears and eventually going into a little
hole in the side of your head right here.
And then that hole is connected to the ear, which turns this into electrical signals,
which go into your brain.
And then your brain is then able to reconstruct what's going on with that person's tongue
and then turn those tongue reconstructions back into first a sequence of sounds and then
a sequence of chunks of words and then a sequence of words.
And those words are then strung into individual little chunks of sentences and then into larger
groups and larger groups and larger groups.
And then suddenly we understand that, oh, wow, when you put those words together in
that order, they carry meaning.
Combining those words together like that changes what those words mean.
And then we're able to situate all of that in the context of the world right now.
And then suddenly, by vibrating little bits of meat around in my head, you understand
my thoughts.
Seriously.
Oh, my God.
Language is not just cool.
It is the coolest thing.
It is the greatest thing.
It is the most complicated thing that you have ever done, that you will ever do, and
that we as a species will ever accomplish.
I'm sorry, particle physicists.
No, language wins.
There is nothing that humans do that is more interesting, more complex, and more fascinating
than language.
more fascinating than language.
And so my goal for this course is to help you understand,
even for just a moment, the complexity of language
and to come to appreciate it and get little tiny chunks of,
yeah, I know how that little chunk works.
And eventually, as you become linguists,
you'll learn how the rest works too,
or at least everything that we know about.
So thank you all very, very much for joining me here today,
and I will see you in class session.
Have a wonderful rest of your day.
