Hello, everybody. Today, we're going to talk a little bit more about what is language,
generally speaking. This is linguistics class, right? We're looking at language. Well, what
is that thing? What are the lines? What makes something language and something else not
language? Today, we're going to get into that a little bit and talk about what's language.
So today's plan, we'll start off talking about, well, what is language? Wow, what a shock.
Then we'll talk about some characteristics that language has. We'll talk about how universal
language is. We'll talk about things that aren't language, but maybe are on the borderline.
And we'll talk about a really sticky question, which is, does language shape our thoughts?
This is, yeah. So anyways, let's go into what is language.
To start with, sort of as good a generic definition as we've got is that language is a system
for linking expressions, and expression can be many things. It can be spoken, it can be
signed, it can be written, but some way of linking expression to meaning. But the thing
is, that's really generic, right? There's not that much of interest there. We're probably
better off not thinking about it in terms of that, but thinking about what makes language
language-like, because that turns out to be a really interesting question.
So what characteristics are always present in language? So there are three big characteristics
we're going to talk about over and over and over again this quarter. First off is arbitrariness.
There are arbitrary relationships between the signs, that is the things that we use
to make language, whether those are words, written areas, or signs in a signed language,
and the things that they signify, things out in the world, like for instance, phone. That
is a thing that can be signified. These languages are always fully productive and very creative.
And then finally, speakers have some knowledge of grammar and rules in language where they
don't have knowledge and grammar of rules of other things.
So okay, to start with, there are arbitrary relationships between the signs and the things
that they signify. What does this mean? Language, like I said, has signs and signified things.
A sign is anything that a human does. This is very, very broad, right? Smoke signals
could be considered a sign, even though they're not language, strictly speaking. We'll talk
about that later on. But there are many things that could be considered a sign.
The signified, though, is usually something in the world. That's a very vague definition.
In the world could mean something that's very concrete. Hey, present a remote. Or it
could mean something that's very abstract. Dignity. Whatever that is. Respect. You can't
point to it necessarily, but it does exist. It's something there.
So the link between these two things is important for us to think about. There are non-arbitrary
signs out there in the world where the sign is linked to the signified. So smoke is a
sign of fire. Sorry, a little too soon. But still, when there is smoke, you look outside,
you see smoke, you're like, oh, something's on fire. This is not arbitrary. The relationship
between these two things is, in fact, causal. By and large, fires cause smoke. Yes, chemists,
I'm aware, but still. Similarly, bleeding is very often a sign of injury. There are
cases where you bleed without injury, but still, it is a, it's usually the case that
if you are bleeding, there is injury going on. If you, you know, touch your face and
you suddenly realize there's blood, then chances are you've been injured in some way, shape,
or form. Similarly, if I'm in a room, this signifies that there will be bad puns, and
this is not arbitrary. Anytime I'm in a room, there are bad puns. I cause the puns to enter
the room. So these are non-arbitrary signs. There is something inherent about these things.
Generally speaking, injury causes bleeding, I cause puns, smoke, I'm sorry, fire causes
smoke. Then there are iconic or representational signs out there in the world where there is
an abstraction. What I mean by that is it's not exactly the same thing as the thing that's
being signified, but it still is a very clear reference to that thing. So emoji are a really
good example of this. If we look at this first little emoji up here, that looks a whole lot
like an umbrella, right? And although if you're from Southern California, you might not know
what that thing is. It's used for rain. Sorry, I came from Michigan. Most recently, I'm bitter.
So there's that. And then you've got a snowman wearing a hat, where the snowman is very clearly
signified, as is the hat. You have a glyph of the sun, and this is very abstract, right?
If you look up at the sun, you never see those little lines, and for that matter, it won't
show up black, by and large. And so it's very abstract, but it is still definitely representing
a sun. Of course, the poop emoji, by and large, you don't see the eyes and mouth. Talk to
your doctor. But anyways, the poop emoji is definitely an abstraction, and the face palm
is very much, I mean, there is an abstraction there, but it's very clear what's going on.
If I send you that emoji, it's very clear what I feel about the thing that you just
sent me. There are also hand gestures that are very iconic, that are representational.
So for instance, in spoken English, you can do the, oh wow, I taught them about speech
perception. This whole thing is iconic, right? It's meant to mean your head exploded, right?
Or somebody angers you, how do you feel about that? That's kind of a, and I'm not saying
hit the person, I'm saying you can do that gesture. And there are other kinds of hand
gestures out there that are very much iconic, that represent the thing that they're meant
to represent. Some sounds that we make, with the mind blown thing, is very much iconic.
Or for instance, you know, oh, I dropped a bomb. This is purely iconic. It doesn't exactly
sound like what a bomb being dropped sounds like, but it certainly has elements of it
that are reminiscent there. There are signs in the world that are very much iconic. For
instance, this one here tells us that there is a bend. Do bends in the road look like
that? No. But it tells us that there is one coming, that it is a sharp bend, rather than
a very shallow bend, and then the part below it is purely arbitrary. Ten MPH doesn't mean
anything about speed at all, but we understand it. But this is very much an iconic sign.
Something to consider. We can contrast this with something that is fully arbitrary. These
things are referential only because we agree that they are referential. Only because there
is widespread knowledge of their meaning. So these can be non-representational symbols
or uses of symbols. So for instance, the first symbol over there, this little guy right here,
is an alchemical symbol. I believe it means Saturn. Does this look like the planet Saturn
in any way, shape, or form? No, not particularly. But it does mean that to people who are well-versed
in, oftentimes astrologers know this symbol too, but people who know alchemy will be familiar
with this symbol. The symbol next to it here, this eggplant, as many of you may be aware,
this has two meanings now. One of them is strictly iconic. It is an eggplant. The other
one is a little bit more arbitrary. Now, many of you may be thinking, Will, the use of the
eggplant to signal a part of the anatomy is kind of iconic though, isn't it? Well, yes
and no. It is, but there are many emoji that are shaped roughly like that, right? But we've
chosen this one arbitrarily. The peach, one could also argue, having another second anatomical
meaning independent of the fruit, there's some element of iconicity there, but the fact
that we've chosen to use peach to mean certain things, or a certain part of the anatomy,
is arbitrary. So there's that. There are also non-iconic gestures. For instance, thumbs
up. There's nothing at all about this in our culture which means, hey, this is good. Okay,
rock on. In fact, in other cultures around the world, this can be a very offensive gesture.
We've seen, and you see shifts in this. For instance, the okay gesture at one point in
time was simply okay. Now it's taken on other secondary meanings, which are maybe not so
desirable these days. So anyways, there are different gestures here that are completely
abstract. They're not iconic. They're just arbitrary. You know, one could even argue
that waving, we do it all the time. It feels very much, but there's nothing necessarily,
there's no reason you couldn't say goodbye to somebody by going, or you know, or even
just, I mean, there's no reason not to have those things. Here's a really good arbitrary
sign. Many of you probably don't know what this sign means. This is a Scottish road sign.
My wife and I, when we went on our honeymoon, saw this sign on the side of a lot of the
roads there, and we couldn't for the life of us figure out what it meant, because there
is literally nothing that it means, right? You could look at it like there is a road
here, because there's kind of the white area up in the corner here, and then there's the
dark in the middle. Maybe that's the case. Could that be it? Maybe there's nothing really
meaningful about it itself. Then we looked it up, and by the way, googling this is like
Scottish sign with white on either side of black, not straightforward. It turns out that
what this means is go the legal speed. There is a designated speed for certain types of
road. You should go that speed here. This is not only the dumbest sign ever, because
it relies on two levels of arbitrary knowledge, knowing what this sign means and then knowing
what the legal speed is. This is a bad sign. Not like if you see this, it's a bad sign
for your life, but it is a sign that is really ineffective. It doesn't show us much of anything
and requires many levels of arbitrariness to understand. So go whatever speed is legal
here is not straightforward there. Let's think about a question real quick. We have the flame
emoji here. In the sentence, oh my God, he started A in his trash can. Is this non-arbitrary?
And iconic, or is this purely arbitrary? Think about it for a second. Okay, the best answer
for this is going to be non-arbitrary, because in this case, this flame emoji refers directly
to fire. This flame emoji refers directly to that thing that we see there. It's not
complete. There's no abstraction really here. It doesn't look exactly like a fire, but we're
talking about the concept fire by picturing a fire. Compare it to this, the fire emoji
in oh my God, that party was, is this iconic and non-arbitrary, or is this arbitrary? Think
about it for a second. I'll stand here awkwardly. So in this case, this is going to be non-arbitrary.
Luckily, I mean, we hope that that party did not involve fire, like literal fire. If you
text somebody that, they're not going to assume, oh God, what happened? Was anybody burned?
That's not what this means. Instead, what this means is, oh my God, that party was lit,
is generally how this would be read. And you can use the fire emoji, because fires are
lit and there's a train there, but you have to know that what this means is actually the
party was really enjoyable, or however you'd like to translate lit into boomer, however
you want. But anyways, that's completely arbitrary. And so there's the difference.
So in terms of arbitrary signifiers, the most important ones for us in this class are going
to be words, right? The connection between words and meanings in language is mostly arbitrary.
I say mostly, we'll touch on that in a second here, but for the most part, it doesn't really,
there's no strong link. This thing in my hand is a remote. It's a presenter remote,
works just fine. But why is it remote? What part of this object here has any link to remote?
Remote? None, really. So the connection between sound and meaning is mostly arbitrary in spoken
language. Koala sounds like this if we look at the acoustics of it, but there's no reason
it needs to, right? It's an independent concept. So koala and koala, the sound are different.
Signed languages, a lot of, one common mistake people make who don't know much about signed
languages is that they think, oh, well, signed languages are just iconic gestures, right?
All you're doing is sort of pantomiming what's going on. Oh, so sleepy must be, or something
like that. But even that's, by the way, iconic because it's like you're putting your head
down, but you can sleep in many ways, right? This can't mean sleepy even if you're a back
sleeper. So anyways, this is an example of a pretty arbitrary sign in ASL. You can make
an argument that the facial expression, which is a component of the sign itself, by the
way, in American Sign Language, as in other signed languages, the face itself provides
useful information. But in this case, tapping, and I believe I'm doing this correctly, tapping
with that shape gives you lazy. We can look at another one here. Lawyer. Is there anything
related to the practice of law in this? You might be able to break the sign apart into
other components that are shared, but in terms of iconicity, there's nothing, if you didn't
see the word lawyer off to the side there, you probably wouldn't know what this meant,
right? And similarly, you're welcome. Not, this is arbitrary. The only way that you would
know this means you're welcome is through established context. But there are iconicity
elements. If this means horse, then that kind of makes sense, right? Because horses have
ears that kind of do these kinds of things on occasion, right? So if this is horse, then
there's some iconicity there. You kind of look a little horsey for a moment when you
make that sign. Similarly, otters. This whole thing, and again, I'm sorry, my ASL is not
really existent. But nonetheless, you see the iconicity there of that looks a little
bit like a cute little otter cleaning his nose and then rubbing his belly or something
like that. This is plausibly ottery, right? So there is iconicity there. Or dead. This
is fun because there's kind of a metaphor, right? And I'm, if you, there's kind of the
idea of to turn over, to die. Again, facial expression. There were other elements mattering
here. Don't, watch him, not me. It's the ASL speaker. But nonetheless, there is an element
of like, Oh, fall over dead, uh, involved with it. And so there's some, that's kind
of on that borderline. But even in signed languages, there are elements of iconicity
and iconicity is very strong in sign languages, certainly. Um, but there are elements that
are arbitrary. So you can't just say, Oh, it's all gesture. It's all pantomime or something
like that. Um, but the thing is, this isn't unique to sign because spoken language has
moments of iconicity too. Um, one example, uh, is onomatopoeia. These are words that
when you speak them sound kind of like the things that they represent. So the one, another
way to think about this is the idea of like the idiophone. This is a similar approach.
Um, and that's a whole link that is a lot of fun. But in English, we've got some onomatopoeia
going on. We have, uh, words like boom, boom, boom starts with a, with an explosion with
a plosive sound and then goes and echoes further out. Sounds a little bit like what we're talking
about. Gurgle, gurgle, gurgle, gurgle, gurgle. Kind of has a little bit of sound symbolism
there to it. Woof, woof, woof, woof. Say that louder. My wife is in the other room and probably
wondering why I'm barking at the screen. Either way, a woof is, is a thing. Um, and it's very
much, it sounds a little doggy, right? Snip, snip, snip, snip. Yeah, kind of a little bit
of iconicity there. Woosh. Yeah. Sounds like something just went by you there. Uh, tweet.
I guess maybe birds sound like the word tweet. I don't know. Either way, onomatopoeia is
a case where you have sounds or words that is, that sound a little bit like the things
that they represent. Um, it's definitely around. It's not super common, at least in English,
but it's there. Um, and like I mentioned last time, actually, roosters say different things.
Uh, they say cock-a-doodle-doo in English, but in Finnish, there's a different onomatopoeia
used for them. Uh, and in Italian and in Urdu and in Hungarian, um, there is a whole website
that you should check out, uh, just talking about the onomatopoeias used for roosters
crowing. And what's worth recalling here is that roosters don't sound different in other
languages. It's not the case that a Hungarian rooster is going to sound remarkably, remarkably
different. Um, you can play the same clip of a rooster crowing for people around the
world and they will produce different things from it. Cool, right? So, um, this gives us
further evidence of this, that different languages can't even map a sound onto a sound uniformly.
It's not the way we work. But the thing is, the very best evidence for arbitrariness is
that words differ across languages. If the link between the signifier and the signified
were not arbitrary, then everybody should have the same word for a concept. Put differently,
if there is some element of remote here that maps onto what I'm doing with my mouth or
in a sign language, what I'm doing with my hands and the other articulators, then all
of the languages should have something very similar for it, right? If there is something
inherent about the word remote and this object here, all the languages should sound kind
of similar, right? But this is not the case. Um, if you speak a language other than English,
this is going to have probably a different word. Um, this is a fish, but in other languages,
in Spanish it's pace, et cetera. And so you can find every language is going to have a
different word for these things. And although there are related languages that have similar
words, and in fact there are accidents too, sometimes where multiple languages will have
similar words for something. By and large, the word for fish is very different around
the world. So this is characteristic number one. There was an arbitrary relationship in
language between the signs, uh, the things that we're using to express and the signified,
the concepts in the world we're talking about. Characteristic number two is that languages
are fully productive and creative. So what does this mean? Um, here's a, uh, an image
here. I'm going to drink some water while I do describe this image to yourself or to
your cat, to your roommate, whoever's around. Describe this image. Think about how you
might do that. Weird, right? This is probably not an image you've seen before. Um, in fact,
it's probably not a thing you've seen before. I kind of hope it's some kind of a robot with
a 48 on his chest, uh, and a slightly nervous smile pointing forward towards what appears
to be maybe a setting sun, uh, in the clouds, maybe on top of a mountain surrounded by very
large fish of an unknown species, which are flying, one of whom appears to be screaming,
and the robot has relatively small non-functional wings. This is not a situation that's come
up before, right, in your life. I, I, I, again, I sort of hope. Maybe you've lived a creative
life. I don't know. But this, yet you, you had the vocabulary, and in fact, if you're
bilingual or multilingual, you have the vocabulary to describe this image in any of those languages.
You are able to take any new concept, any new idea, and talk your way around it, to
circumlocute it. Even if you don't have a word for what this thing here is, a small
winged robot, you can describe it as something. You don't have a word for this species of
fish. You know what? You can still describe what it looks like, right? So language is
able to describe anything eventually, right? It might take time. It might take something
to be circumlocuted, to invent a new word. If I call this fish a, a sprang, then I can
say, oh yeah, and there are a bunch of sprangs behind the robot. Um, there you go. You've
just invented something, but that's a part of language, right? Um, and so that's a possibility,
and it might require incredible skill, right? There, there's the feeling of they should
have sent a poet. Um, you know, like, wow, this sunrise is so amazing that I don't even
have words, but still, if you have enough time, you could probably come up with some.
And so this is creativity. Um, language will get the job done. Any human language is capable
of describing any scenario, given time, given effort, and given perhaps a little bit of
skill. Languages are also capable of producing an infinite number of unique sentences. This
may sound unintuitive at first, but it's absolutely true. Here, um, I'll give you an
example. Um, there, it is very easy to create a sentence that no one has ever spoken before.
So I plan to buy a half empty barrel of Doritos as soon as my penguin gets home with the crown
jewels. I doubt that aside from me in Ling 101, I don't think anyone's ever said this
sentence before. Um, Doritos don't come in barrels. Uh, half empty barrel of Doritos
implies that you should be mostly orange at this point. Um, penguins don't generally
just get home on their own, and when they do, they don't generally have the crown jewels.
This is new. Uh, right? Uh, this is unique and probably hasn't been uttered before. Or
here's one that definitely hasn't. I sure am glad that Michael Bay has agreed to direct
a movie adaptation of my favorite childhood cartoon. Nobody has ever said this. Period.
I'm really bitter and a Transformers fan. You're going to see me knock on Michael Bay
a bunch of times. But still, um, nonetheless, no one's ever said that before. And sentences
beyond that, you may be thinking, okay, well, sure, you can come up with weird, improbable
things, but any sentence can be grown, right? So I saw Anna. Perfectly reasonable sentence,
right? Um, perfectly fine. But I can add something else. I can say I saw Anna yesterday. I saw
Anna yesterday before I refilled the hummingbird feeder. Okay. I saw Anna yesterday afternoon
right after writing a bad pun, but before I refilled the hummingbird feeder, I just,
I'm inserting new elements in here. I inserted the right after writing a bad pun, but before
I, um, et cetera, you can do this and I can keep going. I saw my neighbor Anna who likes
to hug polar bears yesterday afternoon, right after writing a bad pun, but before I refilled
the hummingbird feeder and so on and so on. This particular property of language is called
recursion. The ability to keep adding new things and keep adding things of similar complexity
within that. A sentence can be made to contain elements from other sentences and in fact
whole other sentences infinitely. We'll talk about this a lot more once we get into the
syntax part of it, but this is just a fact. My cat saw the guy who went with Katie, Vincent
and Victoria to the park where the New York Knicks talked to Mary and you keep going over
and over and over again and you can make a sentence that is infinitely long. This can
go on literally forever. I encourage you to try it. Find a friend, a family member, a
roommate or perhaps a stranger that you're staying away from. But still, and then talk,
just try an infinite recursive sentence and see how long it takes for them to stop you.
It's going to be a while. Anyways, so recursion, here's another fun example of recursion, where
the property of the same structure occurring over and over again is a property of language
and makes it very productive. Languages, all human languages, are creative. They are productive.
We are yet to discover a language that is communicatively primitive or unable to describe
reality. Let me just one more time hit on this. There are no languages that anyone has
discovered anywhere in the world that are spoken by a group of people that is unable
to describe some element of reality. It may take a while longer, right? They may not have
words for certain things. If you deal with a language that is relatively pre-contact
and you land a helicopter in the middle, they're probably not going to have terms for a lot
of these things, but you can still talk about the spinning thing on the top, right? Any
group of people is going to be able to describe the world. It is a thing. There are no primitive
languages that lack modern words for concepts and can't even express ... This is all racist
BS. I'm just going to be real with you here. If a language lacks an element of, let's say,
suddenly, oh, okay, I've never seen a laptop before. They'd say, foldy glow thing with
buttons. There we go. There's your new word. Foldy glow thing with buttons. You can also
still have a lot of differences among languages. You can have words that exist in one language
and don't exist in another, where you don't have that nice small unit to grab onto. We
talked about some of these in our first lecture. Still, this is ... There are cultural differences,
of course, but languages are all creative. They are all productive. Any human language
that we found is able to express a very rich set of meanings. This is really important.
Languages are fully productive and fully creative. We need to keep that in mind.
The next characteristic is that speakers have knowledge of grammar. They have knowledge
of the rules of language. Grammaticality judgments are something we've done a little bit already,
but some things sound like English. I can give you an English sentence that sounds like
it should be an English sentence. It's comprehensible, but there are other things that are absolutely
not English. For instance, let's do some grammaticality judgments right now. Think about it on your
own for a second. John went to the park with Tamara. Is this English? Is it good English?
Is it English that if somebody just walked up to you and said it, you'd be like, yeah,
no problem? Chances are, yeah, you think this is probably grammatical, right? Walk Rick
gate Johnny between. Is this English? The words are recognizable to English speakers,
but is this an English sentence? Is this grammatical? No, probably not. Um, there's
not really a way to parse this as a grammatical sentence. The moose fiendishly decalcified
the hieroglyphics between the Dagestani drafts. Is this a grammatical sentence? I think most
of you will agree that yes, it is. It's a weird sentence. It's probably not a sentence
you've ever heard before, but you're still able to make a judgment that, well, okay,
the moose fiendishly decalcified. So he's decalcifying. That's a verb. And fiendishly
here's your adverb. Okay. The hieroglyphics, that's what's being decalcified. And then
where's it happening? Oh, that's right between. Okay. So that means there are two things that,
Oh, the Dagestani giraffes. So those are giraffes from Dagestan. All right. Um, it checks out
a weird sentence, but it checks out. So that's a grammatical sentence, even though it's weird.
Somebody set up us the bomb. All your base are belonged to us. Is this correct? It's
a meme. It's an old meme. Real old name. Proto meme. But still, um, it's not really grammatical.
Somebody set up us the bomb. No, if you were to do this differently, you could say somebody
has set up a bomb on our ship or we have been bombed. Um, all your base are belong to us.
You could say all of your bases now belong to us or something like that. But no, this
is not grammatical. It's not good English and not good in the sense of like, Ooh, this
is the King's English, whatever that means. That's not even a, it's yeah, we'll get there
next time. Trust and believe. Um, but in the sense of just like, this isn't a well-formed
English sentence. So one thing to note though, is that grammaticality judgments are about
language, not about individual words. So I'm going to give you some made up words here.
A gleeble is a small type of fish, a garflavel, or I'm sorry to garflavel is to perform a
very elaborate mating display. And a flundubble is a large octopus like creature. I'm going
to now give you a new sentence here and I'm going to ask you, is the sentence 12 flundubble
garflaveling gleeble grammatical? You have those three new words. Is this a grammatical
sentence? Think about it for a moment. I suspect that most of you said no. Um, because
well, it's missing something, right? It's missing a plural. It should be 12 flundubble
garflaveling gleebles. And even then it's not a sentence. It needs something to, it
needs a verb in there to really be a good sentence. So this is probably not. Let's look
at this one. A gleebles garflavel for flundubbles all the time. Is this grammatical? So I would
argue that yes, this is, because what you're saying here is that gleebles, a small fish,
perform an elaborate mating display for large octopus like creatures all the time. Gleebles
garflavel for flundubbles all the time is a perfectly grammatical sentence. These words
are ridiculous, right? They're not English words, but if you know these words, it works.
It's fine. So, and by the way, you know the plural of gleebles to be gleebles, not gleebles
or gleebles. That's weird. We'll, we'll, we'll get there. Um, magic or phonology either way.
So let me give you a, another example. Um, I'd like you to tell me whether this sequence
is grammatical. So was it? Come on. Was it? Chances are you're looking at me like, wait,
was that the Macarena? Um, and many of you are going, what's the Macarena? Because I'm
old. But anyways, um, many of you are thinking, I have no way of telling. Was that a dance?
Was it supposed to be a dance? Did you have a seizure? What's going on here, Will? Um,
and so the, the, the question is pretty hard to answer, right? There's no grammar in your
mind for whatever the heck that thing just was. Um, and so similarly, you know, you can
do this for anything. Yeah. I can give you a chunk of another language and you're still
not going to be able to understand what it is or judge whether it's grammatical because
you don't speak that language. So in the first case, those gestures were not linguistic.
That wasn't a signed language. That wasn't anything. That was me literally making that
up as I'm filming this thing. Um, and if I give you another chunk of language, um, you
won't be able to make those judgments either, but that's because we speak languages. Um,
and those weren't languages that you spoke, right? We as speakers have very strong feelings
about correctness and rules of language. If something is a language, we're going to have
intuitions. Like that's okay. That's not. But if there's something that isn't language,
like my weird little dance thing, you're not going to have that intuition. You're not going
to have that feeling, but it's not so much for other kinds of basic communicative gestures.
Even for something like, you know, let's say that you are, uh, here's a fun example. Let's
say that you walk up to a store and it is after 6 p.m. and they've just closed. It's
like 601 and you need to drop off a package or something like that. And you see the person
inside the store, uh, and the door is locked. And so you might do something like, and then
you might hold up a package, right? Like, and you might try like, it's okay. I'm not
sketchy or something like that. And then they would probably do something like this, you
know, like, no dude, it's six o'clock. It's past six o'clock. I'm not getting paid enough
for this, but you'd be like, please, please. But there's no grammar here. This is just
kind of a basic communication. There's no reason that I couldn't have done hold up the
package first and then say, you know, please, uh, or something like that, you know? Oh,
there's no way there's no grammar there. So that's the big difference here. This is another
element of language. This correctness, this knowledge of rules and grammar is important.
So this is yet another important element of knowledge of language. That is knowledge of
those rules, knowledge of the grammar. So there are other elements that are important
too. For instance, symmetry, I can talk and you can listen, right? And generally speaking,
two speakers of a language can do both sides of things. Certainly there are cases for instance,
where you have a deaf speaker who is able to, uh, who is able to speak spoken English,
but he's not able to hear English in return. But that's a different situation here. Generally
speaking, if you are a speaker of a language, you are able to produce that language, uh,
and you are able to receive it as well. Um, language can talk about situations not in
the here and now, meaning that with language, I can talk about something that happened last
weekend. You know, last weekend I saw this puppy as I was out walking in the park. It
was the coolest puppy ever. Is the puppy here? No. Um, you've never met this puppy.
Maybe you have. I hope you have. It was awesome. But nonetheless, um, that's not here, that's
not now, but I can still talk about it. Uh, language is made of discrete units, uh, chunks
of sound, chunks of word. Um, what those chunks look like and sound like turns out to be a
really interesting problem, but this is generally held to be true. Language has slang. Language
has taboo words. Um, by slang, I mean words that are not generally acceptable, but are
very often used. Um, this can be new language like heat. Um, this can be, and you can have
taboo words. These are swear words. Um, you know, foul language like ass, for example,
is a taboo word. It is a, and there are other forms of words that are taboo in other languages.
There are languages in which it is, is taboo to talk about certain subjects where names
get tabooed after the person dies, et cetera. There were lots of kinds of taboo, and this
is something that's pretty universal. Um, language also accomplishes functions, right?
Um, when I use language, I'm doing things. I'm asking questions. I'm issuing commands.
There are many things I can do with language, right? And any language can be translated
into any other, not necessarily by one person. It may be the case that, you know, there's
not one person who speaks both, um, I don't know, Kumeyaay and, uh, Hawaiian, but you
might be able to translate eventually that way. Um, but still, um, but the three we're
going to focus on of these characteristics, again, are arbitrary relationships, are productivity
and creativity, and knowledge of grammar, knowledge of rules within the language. So
all human languages share these properties. So this is interesting though, because we
might start asking ourselves, okay, so we've got these things, and in fact, a bunch of
different properties that I just listed that all human languages seem to share, but those
things don't really show up very often in things that aren't human languages. And to
the best of our knowledge, there aren't any other creatures on the earth that are doing
exactly those things. And more importantly, we have not yet found a group of humans working
together in a community of some kind that don't have language, that don't have a language.
Every group of humans that we, as a, well, sort of, I suppose, as a greater connected
species, as a scholarly community, we have never found a group of people without language.
So some theorists have argued that this is evidence for what's called universal grammar.
So universal grammar is an idea that was initially given to us by Noam Chomsky. And actually,
we should talk about Chomsky for a second. Noam Chomsky is a really, really well-known
scholar, both in, frankly, sociology and the dynamics of society. A lot of what Chomsky's
work is nowadays is more political, is more social. But Chomsky, there is absolutely no
doubt, revolutionized the field of linguistics. He changed the field of linguistics in many,
many ways. And the people who've come after him in those traditions continue to have a
very strong influence on linguistics. It's the case, certainly, that not everything that
Chomsky has put forth remains in modern linguistics. And there are many people who don't necessarily
agree with his views generally about linguistics, but it's very hard to overstate the effect
that Chomsky and his ideas had on the field of linguistics.
So anyways, Chomsky is a very, very well-known scholar, and he came up with this idea, or
at least he formalized and coined the term universal grammar. And UG, universal grammar,
holds that there is some genetic basis to human language. There is some biological basis
that makes human language a thing. Put differently, there are some properties of human language
that are innate, that are baked in someplace inside of my head, that are a part of how
I work as a human. These are not just things to do with physical structures. I mean, all
humans, again, barring injury of some variety or perhaps a developmental issue, all humans
have mouths. So as a result, there are going to be similar things that we can all do with
our mouths. And again, we have roughly similarly working sets of articulators. We have similar
sets of hands with similar dexterity. But this isn't what this is about. This is about
deeper grammatical facts. In fact, the argument here is that there is a set of constraints
governing language that are built in someplace to our physiology, not just physical in the
sense of the articulators, but into our mind, so to speak.
One thing to note, though, is that Yuji is not saying that your individual language is
the way it is because of X. That doesn't make a lot of sense. Because, for instance, let's
say that you have a child that is genetically speaking, we'll say the daughter of two Mandarin
Chinese speakers. These people both grew up speaking Mandarin, etc. But if you take that
child at a reasonably young age and that child is raised by English speakers, that child
will speak perfectly fine English, so to speak. There probably won't even be a detectable
accent or anything like that. It's just the case that this will be an English speaker.
And so it's not something about English. It's not something about Mandarin. And the other
reason we know this is that every language is not the same. And in fact, linguistic grammars
vary substantially. Language to language, grammar looks very, very different. But Yuji
is telling us not facts about individual grammars, but that there is a biological predisposition
to language, to capital L language, not just to a language, not to any language generally
speaking. And there are some pieces of evidence for Yuji. Like I said, no cultures, people,
or societies have been found that have no language at all. No other species has been
found with human-like language. We'll talk about that a little bit later. Children do
learn language quite well, actually. It's really impressive. Kids are great at picking
up language. And this is the case even in cultures where people don't speak to children.
And this is a thing. There are cultures in which it is considered just why would you
talk to somebody who is under a certain age? They can hardly understand you. Why bother?
And so children still learn languages in that culture. Similarly, signed languages show
very similar properties to spoken languages. Certainly there are major differences, the
big one being how exactly you're creating, how you're doing the signing, basically, whether
you're doing it with your mouth, with your nose, your throat, etc., or whether you're
doing it with hands, with facial expression. But there are very similar properties in terms
of syntax, in terms of words, in terms of how these things work between signed and spoken
language. And this actually, here's one of the cool ones. There are groups of people,
there are places in the world where a large number of people, due to whatever genetic
anomaly, are born deaf. As a result, in those areas, generally speaking, even if there's
no contact with any other signed language that's come up in the world, a signed language
will develop. This is a group of deaf people who do not have access to a spoken language.
They may have access to some written language, but nonetheless, even that's not universal.
Generally speaking, a community of people will develop a language, even in cases where
they're completely isolated from other signed languages. And those languages that are developed
show similar properties to other spoken languages. This is cool.
And then there are some things that appear to be universal. The big one is that recursion
thing I was talking about, where you can put a sentence inside a sentence inside a sentence
inside a sentence. That's recursion. Of course, there's some evidence against UG too. Namely,
there doesn't seem to be really good biological evidence for it. No one has yet found where
it should live or a part of the genetic code, et cetera. So this, we're not seeing the biology
that we might expect from this. There is a lot of variability in language. In fact, even
that claim about recursion being found in every language, that could be a little sketchy
depending on who you talk to too. I mean, it's very hard to falsify this. Oh, there's
an innate reason why all humans in communities end up with language. Well, they're in communities,
right? That could be part of it. So it's hard to falsify this. And the other thing
is a lot of these properties are derived from facts about communication. A lot of the things
that we're doing come from both physical constraints as well as from like, okay, turn taking, stopping
when the next person starts talking and going back and forth. Yeah, that kind of comes about
pretty naturally if you're communicating with somebody, right? That's a thing.
So, yeah. And then, like I said, recursion might not be universal. Dan Everett is another
linguist, very, very well known, who claims that speakers of Pinhá, which is a very interesting
language, spoken in Brazil, do not have recursion. There are arguments on either side, but it
sure seems like if there is recursion, it's much, much weaker than in a lot of other places.
And that's a very neat language, generally speaking. It does a lot of things that are
typologically, that is when compared to all the other languages in the world, kind of
fascinating. So we'll talk about that. And then the other big thing is that Chomsky himself
is not a hundred percent sure on UG anymore either. So, you know, there is definitely
some strong evidence against it, but it is an interesting idea. And it's one you should
definitely think about. We're not going to come down hard on either side of this. I have
personal beliefs about how language works, but it's not really my place to share those
strictly speaking here. UG is a very interesting idea. It's something you should be aware is
an idea, is a concept, is a theory. Whether it turns out to be real or not, whether it
turns out to actually be true, we may find out, we may never find out, but it's still
an interesting idea to think about. So some elements of linguistic structure may be innate,
but we're not a hundred percent sure about that. And there are very, very smart people
on either side of the field. And in fact, the textbook that I've given to you, the Frumpkin
textbook, in the ninth edition is very, very pro-UG. It's like, yeah, UG is a thing. And
then in the 11th edition is very like, oh, well, there is UG. That's, that's definitely
a theory. It's an interesting thing. So we've seen shifts in this. The debate on this is
very much alive and well. And there are a bunch of smart folks who've lined up on both
sides of this argument. You know, one of the people, I know, I know lots of good UG believers
and it's true. People who know a lot about language and still see the world in that way,
and that's completely fine. I'm not going to wade into that. I just wanted you to know
the idea behind UG so that when it comes up, you don't hear universal grammar. That means
all languages are the same. No, wrong, incorrect. Speaking of arbitrary gestures, there's no
reason this means no, just saying. Anyways, so now we've got a pretty good handle on what
language is, right? So what isn't language? What are things that aren't languagey? So
one of these things is alternative means for coding languages. A good example of this is
semaphore, flag code. For those of you in the boating world, this, this is a thing or
Morse code. The dot, dot, dot, dot. Morse code is a way to encode English. You are turning
English letters into specific sequences of dits and dots, basically. So that's Englishy.
Did I just turn off my, I think I just broke my remote. That's stellar. Wow. All right.
Hopefully it'll work again. Okay. Anyways, so Morse code is just recoding an existing
language. Wow. Note to self, this remote doesn't like enough Morse code. So other things that
are not absolutely languages or that are absolutely not languages. One of them is writing systems.
Writing systems are very closely associated with other languages. Oh, sure. Now my remote
works. Oh, great. One of the buttons. Okay. Back at the ranch. So writing systems are
very closely associated with an existing spoken or sign language. If we're looking at a language's
writing system, it is usually pretty, it's tracking pretty close with a version of the
language. There are example languages around the world where the writing system is very
old and the language has continued evolving. So Tibetan is an example of a language that
has a writing system that is capturing a very old version of the language. So if you
look at the writing system next to the language, they've got a lot of diversion, but they're
still based on the same thing, right? Or Arabic. Modern written Arabic is very different from
modern standard Arabic and certainly different from all the various dialects out there. So
writing systems are not languages in and of themselves. They're related to a language
which they are used to encode. Computer programming languages are also not really linguistic.
They're not languages in the classical sense. These are languages and we call them languages.
It's right there, but they're not in the human sense like COBOL or C++, Java, Python, Rust,
et cetera. This is not human language here. It is sort of readable, but it's got some
troubles. Let's think about why they might not be languages. So arbitrary relationships
between signed and signified. Does that work? Well, yeah. Because why does if or then, why
does that matter? So there's no reason why a programming language has to be designed
in the way that it is in terms of the names of functions of constructs, et cetera. Arbitrary.
That's fine. What about fully productive and creative? Can you use, for instance, Rust
to mark a sunset? Can you really describe a sunset in Rust? Probably not. You might
be able to generate a picture that looks like the sunset and that's pretty good, but that's
not the same thing as language. Can you send a love letter to somebody in Python? Actually,
I bet somebody has. I should do that. Anyways. But no. There's not really you can't talk
about certain domains of human existence. Can you describe how something hurt your dignity
in Python? No, you'd probably have to do something else like create a program that shows how
that might have felt or something like that. I don't know. But emotions are an area, for
instance, where programming languages are not great. And then speakers having knowledge
of grammar and rules? Yeah, that's a thing. Absolutely 100%. You can look at my Python
code and go, oh, well, that's bad. And I'll be like, no, I'm a researcher. It only has
to run once. Anyways. So programming languages, not languages. Nope. Not at all. Maybe someday
there will be true natural language programming. This is different, by the way, from natural
language processing. Natural language processing is using computers to analyze spoken human
or well, to analyze human language. Whereas natural language programming is using human
language to program a computer. That that's not a thing yet. So sorry, Hal, but computing
languages are not language. How about non-human animals? You know, by the way, whether or
not humans or animals is kind of interesting linguistically speaking. Right. Anyways, lots
of animals communicate. Right. You have mating calls, which for the most part is what birds
are saying. They're either saying, you know, hey, come over here. I'm feeling amorous.
Or hey, there's a predator up there. Or perhaps, hey, no, no, no. This is my tree. Get away.
And so that's there's a lot of communication out there. If you look at the hummingbirds
out on your porch, they're going to be communicating. But it's usually going to be one of those
three things. I'm horny. I'm scared. Or you're on my turf. But that's not the same thing
necessarily as human language. I've thrown a couple of videos in here that you can link
to in the slides there that are quite excellent. But non-human language is is difficult. One
person actually, well, what group of people set out to see basically, OK, yeah, we're
not seeing any non-humans that have language and that have anything like human language.
But no one's teaching birds language either. Right. No one's teaching chimps to speak English
or to speak a language. Why? Why not? Maybe we should try this. And the result of this
experiment was, well, it was done to Nim Chimpsky. Yeah, the name's pretty clever.
The story is ultimately kind of sad. The idea with Nim Chimpsky, which is this particular
ape right here, was a chimpanzee that was raised by a human family to learn American
Sign Language. They use sign language because completely independently of anything cognitive,
the chimpanzee tongue and such is not well suited for English. Right. So ASL is much
more plausible. And so there was Herbert Terrace was raised in a... I'm sorry. Yes,
I'm sure Herbert Terrace was raised in a human family as well. But Nim Chimpsky was in this
study by Herbert Terrace. Nim learned about 125 signs. There's some debate as to exactly
what constitutes its own sign. That's difficult anyways. And combined those signs to produce
utterances that were maybe two to four words. But the problem is that there there's no evidence
that he ever developed, he being Nim Chimpsky, ever developed full on language because never
got past two to four sign utterances. It was all sort of constrained there, whereas humans
will go on for a while. Right. You get things like Nim, banana, me, eat. Not super human
languagey and very here and now. Only seven percent of the utterances actually advanced
a conversation. Right. If you were talking with a fellow human and you're interested
in continuing that, there's kind of a back and forth. Right. Your words integrate in
some way with their words and then you kind of move forward together. You're going through
this communicative alley. So that's different. Thirty nine percent of those utterances were
repetitions of what was just signed. Right. So if I sign one thing to you when you sign
the exact same thing back, does that count? Probably not. And it was all pragmatic. This
is the big thing. All of the language that was used by Nim was very pragmatic. Things
like Nim, banana, me, eat. I'm hungry or I'm sleepy. Or where is mom? These are not
things that are really abstract. It was never like, wow, you never really look at trees,
but there sure are a lot of leaves on those. That's kind of cool. Right. That's a very
non-pragmatic utterance. Or I wonder why is this water bottle black? That's non-pragmatic.
It doesn't serve to do anything except give me a reason to pick up the water bottle because
I am thirsty. Anyways, terrorists argued that Nim Chimsky never actually learned much of
anything linguistic. But there were also a lot of methodological troubles with this.
In practice, this is actually a really sad story because as male chimps do, became really
strong, really violent, and ended up really injuring one of his keepers. And then later
on they gave the chimp to a research facility and used him for medical research. He still
did use signs from time to time and died at an animal rescue ranch of a heart attack many,
many years later. There is a very sad documentary, but very accurate one called Project Nim that
goes deep into this. And I don't know that I would recommend it for the class because
frankly for the study of language you sort of know the high points here. But it's a very
interesting documentary, if nothing else, on sort of the ethics of this kind of research
and what these things actually mean in practice. So that's the Nim Chimsky story. But what
it does tell us, linguistically speaking, is that here's a non-human animal, and one
that we believe to be substantially intelligent, one that we believe to have a pretty good
shot at this, and articulatorily had all the ability to make signs, and was given a
strong chance, maybe not a perfect chance, like I said there were some methodological
issues here, but was given a pretty good chance at learning human language, and Nim didn't.
So this tends to make us think, well maybe that's not a possibility. There are lots of
other cool language-y things that go on in the world. These are brown-headed cowbirds.
You'll see them very rarely around these parts, but they're out there a little bit more as
you go east. But still, brown-headed cowbirds are birds that are what are called brood
parasites. This is a really, it's a dick move, let's be real here. What these birds do is
they will see a songbird nest, and they'll go, huh, looks like a nice nest, and they'll
just run over and lay an egg in it. And then the songbird will come back and go, huh, I
don't remember that many eggs, eh, whatever, and then raise that egg. And then they will
raise that baby, and that baby will grow much bigger than the other babies in the
nest, and eventually usually push those other babies out, and so this bird will have unwittingly
raised a brown-headed cowbird. This is questionable, but the bigger question is why do brown-headed
cowbirds sound like brown-headed cowbirds rather than like the bird that raised them?
Right? Because this is the exact opposite in some ways of the Mandarin-speaking parents
giving birth to a child raised by English speakers will grow up speaking English. Here,
brown-headed cowbird is raised by, say, a goldfinch, and then speaks brown-headed cowbird.
Interesting. This is really kind of cool, and what's interesting is that there's some
evidence of these innately recognized passphrase calls. Actually, a really good friend from
middle school of mine does his work on brown-headed cowbirds now. He's an ornithologist,
and so we have some interesting conversations about that, but it turns out that there are
these innately recognized calls that kind of serve as passwords. These are my people.
And then finally, another video that might be fun to watch is the waggle dance.
Honeybees are able to express by basically waggling, by dancing in their hive, things like
the distance, the direction, etc. towards a source of food. This is a way that honeybees can share
with other honeybees information about all those kinds of things. So the waggle dance is really
interesting, and it kind of feels like this could be nearly language. Bat vocalizations are a thing.
Bat vocalizations have good information about the speaker, about the behavior context, like,
I'm feeding, or mating, or perching, or sleeping, and they can even address a listener. So you could
get in a bat vocalization, hey, Herbie, let's mate, or something like that. Prairie dogs also
have really strong... there's one particular person who's done most of this work, but he argues that
prairie dogs have not only different alarm calls, and if you've ever walked by a prairie dog colony,
you will see that they will... out of their little thing as soon as you start walking by.
And once you move past, they'll stop doing that, but you get these little barks,
right, from all the prairie dogs. And so the prairie dog language is... these different calls
are marking the presence of different, well, different predators. And these calls... hey,
my remote's working again. Okay, cool. But the different calls show different species of
predators. That's a human, that's a coyote, that's an eagle, and they give information about location,
size, shape, and even color of predators, to the extent where he was able to determine that, oh,
this person's wearing a red shirt, based on the prairie dog calls, and showing abstract shapes,
like taking, you know, big triangles and moving them past prairie dog colonies in a very awkward
set of experiments, they were able to detect differences between triangles and squares,
and things like that. Interesting. And so prairie dogs are actually judging your outfit,
which is interesting, and so this feels kind of languagy. But it's still missing some information.
Again, here's a great video you should check out. Is it language, though? Well, the thing is,
we've only really seen one domain of their language. This is a rich vocabulary of, oh crap,
hide, right? There's no sign of non-pragmatic language use. That said, we might not be
equipped to do that. Maybe once they're in their little ovals at night, they're like, wow, dude,
have you ever really looked at your hand? Or something like that. Maybe that's going on,
but we haven't seen any evidence of it. We also don't see anything temporarily removed,
you know, leave a microphone out there and you're not going to see like, remember that one predator
that had like the big red triangle looking thing? That was really weird, right? Why have we never
seen one of those again? We don't see that. And so that's a thing. We would need a lot more data
to call this language, but it sure smells languagy. The question, though, I have to come
down somewhere, right? Do non-human languages have, I'm sorry, do non-human animals have language?
Right now, based on the state of our knowledge, nobody has human language yet. There's evidence
of really complex info out there. I mean, animals are doing things that feel very complex, feel very
linguistic-y, but we're going to need evidence before this is language. One thing to note though
is that I probably, well, I expect that this is going to change. You know, it'll be awkward to
reuse this video for a long time just because I'm pretty rapidly balding, that'll be apparent,
but nonetheless, I expect that I'm going to be singing a different tune at the end of my career
here. We keep finding new interesting studies about this. We keep seeing more instances of
animal language, and we're getting a little bit further away from the idea of UG. Universal
grammar holds because we're saying language is an innate part of humans. Suddenly that makes it
sound like, well, if you're not human, you can't have language. So there's a little bit of a bias
associated with that. We're also getting better at understanding means by which animals can
communicate. So for instance, if you have an alien walk into this room right now, or walk into a
conversation, and they don't see visible light, and they don't hear frequencies between 20 hertz
and 20,000 hertz, they would think that we're telepaths, right? Because they can't see me doing
anything, and they can't hear me doing anything. All that they're going to see is like microwave
transmissions, and I'm sure not making those. So they're just thinking, wow, it's weird. How do
these people get things across? That's funky. And so as we get better at instrumentally being able
to talk about prairie dogs, as we get better at these kinds of things, we're probably going to
discover more. And then the other thing to remember is, of course, we're kind of interested in not
discovering animal language. There are going to be a lot of awkward things when we figure out,
you know, we may not be the only people with language, and we don't want to know the bovine
word for mourning at some fundamental level, or at least I sure don't, but I'm vegetarian, whatever,
right? So we know what language is now. We know it's universal, although there's some variation,
and we know that animals don't seem to do any of it yet. Now for a really potentially scary part
of language, right? Here's the thing. You're thinking. Right now, do some thinking. Think.
Go while I drink. Good think? How'd you do it? Yep, using language. So here's the awkward thing.
If you think in language, if we use linguistic concepts to categorize the world, if you have
remote as a word for this, but you might not have a term for this little device that is on my shirt
here. If you don't know the term lavalier microphone, it's going to be a little harder to think about
this little concept, right? So we use these concepts to organize the world. We discuss the
world using our available set of terms, right? And we do lack terms for more abstract feelings.
For instance, imposter syndrome is a term that a lot of people are not familiar with, but everybody
should be. This is an aside, but this is the feeling that you don't belong in a certain
context, that you're a fraud. You're not good enough to be, for instance, in a university,
to be a university professor, et cetera, and that somebody is going to find out and kick you out
shortly. This is, I think basically every academic does this, and the ones who don't are,
well, they've got their own things going on. But anyways, this is super common. It's a feeling
that I think a lot of people get as they're in school, pardon me, and as they teach in school.
But once you have a word for it, it's a little easier to think about it. It's a little easier
to talk about it, right? So we're thinking in language as we're doing these things. And so
language is a part of our thinking process, which is fascinating. And this leads a bunch of people
to ask, well, okay, if we think in language, does the language we speak determine how we think?
And this gets at the idea of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. This is also known as linguistic
relativity, the idea that, again, any time that you're thinking, you're thinking in language,
so then your language must affect your ability to think. The language you speak influences how
you think about the world. This is fascinating, and it's terrifying, because at some level,
wow, this reveals whole things about how humans might work depending on their language.
But it's also terrifying, because am I, as an English speaker, less able to think than somebody
who is a speaker of Hindi or Kumeyaay or is this? So there are many ways that this could look,
right? One thing, there could be no effect. The language that we speak has no effect on
our cognition. That's a possibility, right? It could be a very weak effect. The language that
we speak has some effect on our thought and cognition, but there's not too much there.
It could be something very strong. The language that we speak guides our thoughts. It guides our
cognition. And it could be deterministic. The language we speak binds or bounds or determines
our thought and cognition. We cannot think in such a way outside of being an English speaker
as an English speaker. At this point in time, there are a bunch of these different options,
ranging from complete determinism to complete nothingness. It really feels like we're somewhere
in the middle. At this point in time, there's some pretty good evidence that there is an effect of
your language on how you think. These come from a whole bunch of different options, but ranging
from like color chip studies. For instance, different languages have different color,
ways of breaking up the world in terms of color, and even different people within a language.
We recently repainted our home, and by God, walking into a paint store, there were some
color differences there, right? I think this is web gray around me as opposed to,
oh God, what was the other one? Web gray and then newsprint gray. Yeah, very monochromatic. But still,
the fact that you have different terms to categorize color might make you categorize
a bunch of color chips laid out at a table, which is a physical act differently. A good example of
this is in Russian. There are actually two different color terms for what English speakers
would refer to as blue. You have something that is, which is a dark blue, something closer to
this kind of a color. Dirty textbook reveal, but this is a dark Navy style blue, as opposed to
which is, do I have something around? Yes, this hand sanitizer label. This would be a
a very light blue or something like that. And as a result, you end up with two different color terms
that both mean what we would call blue. And if you give Russian speakers a bunch of blue chips
and you ask them, sort them into piles, you'll get two piles. Whereas for most English speakers,
you'll get one. So that's an effect, right? But what other effects this has? It's about effect
size. It's clear that there's something. And in fact, you're going to watch a YouTube video by
Dr. Boroditsky here at UCSD. But it's also clear that it's not deterministic. It's also
clear that we are not limited by our use of, we're not limited in our thoughts by the language that
we use. We can still recognize objects and events and colors that we don't have words for.
If you've never seen this object right here, you have no idea what this is. You don't have
a word for it, but we can still discuss it. We can still describe it, et cetera,
the way it's a privacy cover for a webcam. Anyways, we can still get away from that. We can
still do it. So the debate is now mostly focused on the size of the effect, on the nature of the
effect. What does this actually look like and how much it actually matters in our lives?
This is a really cool area of research. In fact, as I was just getting started as a linguist,
I was really interested in this. I was really obsessed with it. I ultimately kind of came to
the conclusion that the effects of it are cool. It's fascinating. It's something I'd love to play
with, but A, vowels are way cooler, and B, the effect isn't going to be so big that it's going
to change my life either way. I wish we could spend more time here. I wish we could think about
this a little bit more, but we're limited by our language and our ability to think about it
anyways. So that's the other thing. Anyways, so that's language and thought, and it's a cool
subject, and I encourage you to do more reading about it if it's something that interests you,
but that's what we're going to do with it this quarter. So next time, we're going to make sure
you do watch this TED Talk. It's actually quite good, and I've got a link to it both in the
syllabus as well as right here in the slides. Thank you very, very much, and have an absolutely
wonderful rest of your day. Bye, everybody.
