Okay. Hi, everybody. Today we're going to talk about what a language is, not just what
capital L language is, but how can we tell one language from another. But before we go
further, for those of you who do actually want to print out slides to take notes, you
can add that little chunk to the end of the URL and get a printable version of it in Chrome.
And then also this is just amazing. I love linguistics memes. It's just, it's a thing.
Feel free to send me good linguistics memes. So yeah, there's that. So let's go ahead and
talk about, uh, today, what is languages? You know, what are, what are individual languages?
How can we tell the difference? So our plan today is to talk about what languages are,
uh, how we can tell what they are and talk about the fact that language is fractal. We'll
talk about what's right and what's wrong in language. We'll talk about prescriptive versus
descriptive grammar, and we'll talk a little bit about what that means for our society.
So what are languages? What are individual languages? Well, there were 7,097 living languages
in the world. Those last two numbers, I wouldn't really trust them. It's very hard to say this
is a language, this one isn't, et cetera. So there's some variation there, but ballparky
around 7,000 living languages in the world. That number is plummeting very, very quickly,
which is part of the reason why language documentation is so important, but that's roughly how many
we've got of those 23, only 23 of those languages are spoken by more than 50 million people
given that's a lot of people. But of the 23 languages of the world spoken by more than
50 million, many of you will recognize some of them. For instance, Chinese certainly is
up there, Spanish, English, Arabic, Hindi. Most people have heard of these languages,
but some of the other languages maybe not. Landa, Javanese, Telugu, Urdu. Are you familiar
with Malay? No, probably not. And so a lot of these languages are huge. They're massively
widely spoken languages, but a lot of Americans haven't even heard of them. So it's important
to remember that there are a lot of languages out there and some of them we're familiar
with and some of them maybe not as much. So anyways, there are a lot of languages out
there and many of them are spoken by a lot of people. Chinese is the most spoken language
in the world with around 1.3 billion people. But the question is, wait, hold on. 1.3 billion
people all speak the same language? Not quite, no. As linguists, we would take issue with
that statement and here's the reason why. Language, as you might imagine, is complicated
for linguists, right? So this is the earth. That's a sweet earth, you might say. But this
is not exactly, this is not going to be tractable, so let's schematize. That's what we do as
linguists, right? We generalize to survive. Bam, that's the earth. On the earth, we've
got different people and those people speak different languages. And I've just populated
the world with some languages here. Whatever, seven, close enough. These are different languages
and how do we know they're different? We're going to get at that actually another day.
That's sort of a different question there. But it's a little tricky to tell the difference
sometimes, but for the moment, we'll just focus on one of them. Let's just pick, oh,
a language, language A, fun. And for the purposes of this class, we're just going to use English.
By the way, I'm aware that we do a lot of English in this class and I'm actually self-conscious
about that, right? I kind of wish that we didn't do as much English as we did in this
class. The problem is we all speak English, right? And if I use an example from English,
you all understand it a lot more quickly than if I have to teach you a little bit of
something about Telugu before we can even start thinking about the example. So for reasons
of being in a quarter system, we do a lot of English here. But yeah, so there's that.
So we're going to start by talking about English. English is luckily just one monolithic thing,
right? Everybody who speaks English does it the same, right? Right? Wrong. In fact, there
are many different varieties of English spoken around the world. English is spoken very,
very widely, and in some cases more widely than people expect. Most people know we speak
English in the U.S. here. We speak English among many languages here in the U.S., but
also Canada, also India. There are many people in India for whom English is their first and
only language. Usually not only language, but it is a first language for many people
there. The U.K., Singapore is an area with a very large population of native English
speakers, and there are many places in Africa where people grow up speaking English, and
their English is its own kind of English. And in fact, if you look at different places
around the world, every English has its own hallmarks. There are things that go on in
Singaporean English or Singlish that don't go on in mainstream U.S. English. But nonetheless,
we can subdivide a little bit, and by and large, they share a lot more than they don't
share, right? All of these things are kind of Englishy. But if you look at, for instance,
New Zealand English versus African English versus British or Australian English, they're
different, but they're not so different, right? There are some similarities there.
So English itself is kind of fraud, right? If you've got all of these things that sound
a little bit different, what's English? Okay. Just let's try and put some of that complexity
aside here. Let's focus on American English. Once we're in America, though, everything's
the same, right? No, absolutely not. Even here in the U.S., English is spoken in many
different ways. Just thinking regionally speaking, the West, people from, say, Colorado, where
I'm originally from, speak English in a certain way. People from the upper Midwest, you know,
you've got the northern cities. So, for instance, Chicago, Wisconsin, you know, that kind of
area has a dialect thing going on. Southern English is, of course, a thing, right? Southern
speakers have a different flavor of English. California English is also 100% a thing.
There are features of California English. We're going to play a little bit with this
in one of our upcoming activities. But you can figure out where somebody is from on the
basis of, well, tests. You can figure out by asking them questions, maybe where they're
from, and you can see how their English varies a little bit.
So if we think about syntax, then a sentence like the gate needs fixed, is this an acceptable
sentence to you? The gate needs fixed. My headphones need recharged. My computer needs
defragmented. Is that fine? For many people, it will be, but I think probably for more
people in a Californian classroom, yeah, that's probably not going to be okay for a lot of
you. It's perfectly fine for me, but I also grew up around some folks from Oklahoma, right,
where that's very common. How about this sentence? I might could have some lunch. You might should
go to the park next weekend. This is called a double modal construction. Super common.
I've got a good friend from Kentucky who has this every day, and it's amazing, right? But
for many people, that's going to be perfectly fine. For other people, that's not so much
going to be fine. How about pronunciation? These two words here, the pointy one is a
pin for me, and the writing instrument is a pen. So you have pin and pen, pin, pen.
For me, there are two different vowels there. We would write them using two different IPA
characters. For other people, I've got a good friend who's from Louisiana, actually, originally,
and if you talk to him, he has a pin and he has a pin. These are two completely different
objects, but they are pronounced identically. He has what's called the pin-pen merger, and
it's the case that all words with those vowels are going to be there. So for instance, kin
in the sense of I have family, kin in that area, and the name Ken, K-E-N, are going to
be identical for him. How about these three words? Say them aloud for a second. Are they
the same for you? Do you have the same vowel in all of these words? One thing to note,
by the way, I know you're watching these online, but it is really genuinely helpful for you
to pronounce things, especially when we get to phonetics. You want to make these sounds.
It will make it easier. It's a form of proprioceptive learning, learning how your mouth works, focusing
on that, really important. So make the sounds, do the activities I request, just because
it's going to make it easier for you. I'm not just trying to make you make weird noises
at home, right? So okay, you've got Mary, you've got Mary, and you've got Merry. For
me, I've got eh, eh, so Mary, Mary, Merry. Eh, eh, eh. Those are slightly different vowels.
But there are people around the country who have all three being independent, all three
are different. There are people who have all three merged, or just one of them is separate.
So either way, this is yet another thing that tells us about regional dialect.
Then how about this word right here? So this word is dude, dude, dude. So let's try it.
This is a really important word here in California, right? So I could walk up to somebody and
I could say, hey dude. And how does that sound? Hey dude. Dude, that's a nice car. Is that
weird? Yeah, it's a little weird, right? In fact, a lot of people in California will extend
that vowel a little bit. So you'll get dude, dude, dude, dude. That's a nice surfboard.
Dude, great car. Dude, I was just there last week. This doesn't sound right. This is tripping
your boomer alarm, right? Like wait, something's wrong here. He's not that old. Something's,
the problem that, the thing that I'm doing wrong here is actually I'm not pronouncing
the word correctly. I have the IPA up here. So it's duh, ooh, and then here it's extra
long. Ooh, and then duh. But I should make that ooh fronted. Uh, what I should do is
move my tongue a little bit farther forward in the mouth. This is a very common thing
in California. Most Californians have oohs that are a little more front in their mouth.
So it goes from being dude to dude, dude, dude. And so if I say dude, that's a nice
surfboard. That's much better. It's still awkward for me to say that, but dude, nice
car. That fronting is really important. So the difference between dude and dude is that
fronting there. And that's a key part of the California dialect.
Here's another fun piece of dialect work. This little warehouse right here, sell your
iron to Walter Zion. I was driving around at one point in time in a part of the country
that will currently remain nameless. And I drove by this warehouse and I looked down
and I said, that's dumb. Sell your iron to Walter Zion. Why would I put that on the side
of a warehouse? That's a stupid slogan. And so I kept driving and I kept driving and then
suddenly I turned around because, oh my God, that's an amazing slogan because I remembered
where I was. Say these words aloud. Is this an awesome slogan or not? For me, sell your
iron to Walter Zion is not an awesome slogan. But in that area, which was near Acushnet,
Massachusetts, so Southern Massachusetts, it really, really was a good slogan because
this is sell your iron to Walter Zion. A local person would have sell your iron to Walter
Zion. This rhymes beautifully, but sell your iron to Walter Zion doesn't fly in San Diego.
Sell your iron to Walter Zion. Great, great, great slogan. So, regional. You also get differences
in vocabulary from where you're at. The word for this creature right here. Any thoughts?
I know, you're talking to your computer screen. This is way better with an audience. Anyways,
for many people this is a dragonfly, right? For other people, this can have other terms.
Mosquito hawk is relatively common. Darning needle is common. Weirdly enough, in Breath
of the Wild, this is the Zelda game for the Nintendo Switch, they have the term darner.
Darner for this kind of creature, which is really weird. This is a game created by Japanese
people and yet we have darner as the term for a dragonfly. Super unusual. It really
caught me off guard, but it's actually attested in American English in some regions. Here's
one that's going to start a fight. What is the generic word for a fizzy sweet beverage?
We have A, pop. B, soda. C, soda pop. D, coke. E, cool drink. So, I'm sure you've already
made your decision. You've probably dug in. You're thinking, oh God, everything else is
wrong. Stop, Will. So, the correct answer is B, soda. No, that's complete bias. Turns
out that this is a super important dialect test. So, there is a huge debate about pop
versus soda in the United States. What we see here is that actually it really varies.
If we look in this central region here, in the Midwest, we see a whole bunch of pop going
on, right? This whole region is pop country. When I moved from Colorado, and more specifically
from near Denver, which was soda country, to Michigan, which was pop country, it messed
with me. Somebody said, I was buying a 12 pack of soda, and the lady at the checkout
said, do you want your pop in a bag? I said, why the hell? I didn't say this, but I thought
it was like, why the hell would you pop a bag? That doesn't even make sense. Then it
was like, I moved. I'm in Michigan now. So, I entered pop country. If you go down south,
you end up with Coke, as the generic term. So, the sentence, would you like a Coke?
Yes. Which kind? Sprite. Completely logical, right? So, there is a whole map about this.
In California, this is so firmly soda country, it's not even funny, as in Massachusetts,
or frankly, the New England generally, all soda country. So, pop and soda turns out to
be a really big debate. How about this thing right here? So, different terms are available
for this. What's your term? If you had to point somebody to this thing, what would you
call it? Chances are, you have one of three things. You either have water fountain, you
have drinking fountain, or you have bubbler. How many of you have bubbler? Bubbler is interesting,
because bubbler is something that only shows up in a couple of places. By and large, California,
or drinking fountain territory. Water fountain is also an option. But then, there's bubbler.
Bubbler shows up in a couple of places. It shows up in Massachusetts. It shows up in
Wisconsin, which is entertainingly the place where the Kohler Corporation is based, who
first marketed these things under the name bubbler. So, that's why it's stuck out there.
And then in Portland. Residents of Portland have the term bubbler. And that's because
one rich person, and I actually saw one when I went to Portland. I was excited, because
God, I'm a nerd. Some person's last name, like the Benson Bubblers, is an installation
of free public drinking fountains in Portland. And that was enough to shape or change language
in that area. So, bubbler is available in three parts of the country. A lot of the people
who raised me, so to speak, were from Massachusetts. As a result, I grew up with bubbler. I went
to school, kindergarten, and I was doing it wrong. People were looking at me, so funny.
What the? What's a bubbler, Will? Like, I go, Mommy, Mommy, I don't know the words
for things. It was traumatic, but that's okay. We all have our trauma, right? So, not everybody
from a region, it's important to highlight, will have all of the dialect features. This
is as much a function of attitude as location. Somebody can grow up in the deep south, so
to speak, and not really have much of that accent. Or they can have parts of it. A good
friend of mine is, like I said, from Louisiana, but his accent is, by and large, not that
southern. He doesn't have the strong Louisiana accent that a lot of members of his family
and a lot of his friends have. He has elements of it. He's got the pin-pen merger, but most
of it is not. If you listen to him, by and large, you're not going to hear too much of
the southerness in there. And this comes down to rootedness. This is an idea actually put
forth by an academic friend of mine, Paul Reed, basically asking, how rooted are you
to this area? Do you want to come back if you leave? Do you want to leave as quickly
as you can? And so, if you really feel a strong connection to an area, you'll have your accent.
You'll have the accent more strongly, and you'll probably keep the accent if you move
away, as opposed to somebody who really has no connection to the area or wants out, they'll
probably lose that accent quickly or might not develop it at all. But there are a lot
of regions and regional features that we really haven't covered yet. We can't go all the way
into it. But okay, cool. So we've hit the level of maximum complexity, right? We have
the west, we've got northern cities, upper midwest, and even California. It can't get
that much more complicated than that, can it? Yeah, not that simple. Because even within
California, you have young speakers, you have old speakers. And they're going to speak differently,
right? Young speakers will say things like, yeet, or simp. And old people are going to
be like, no, you stop saying, you stop saying simple in the middle of it. Finish your words,
young man. Anyways, so that's going to be a major difference. You'll get men speaking
differently from women, from non-binary speakers to trans speakers. All different people will
have different elements of their speech. And part of this can be physiological, based on
things like vocal fold visiology. And part of it is just in terms of presentation. How
it is that you want to portray yourself in the gender continuum. So all different categories
of folks and different identities will have different speech factors. Folks who are gay,
lesbian, bi, queer, and so forth. There are many, many factors that can make somebody
sound gay, so to speak, as a part of their speech. This is sort of a well-known phenomenon.
And actually looking into what those are is really interesting. This is the domain of
sociophonetics, if you're thinking about sound, strictly speaking.
Speakers of AV, African American Vernacular English, or Black English. AV is a, this is
by the way, also previously known as Ebonics. We're not going to use that term because it's
very loaded. It's gotten, a lot of people have used it. It's basically become a slur.
So we're going to stick with AV. But speakers of African American Vernacular English will
have variations in their languages, right? As will Latina, Latinx, or Chicana, Chicanx
speakers. That should be an X over there. But you know, folks who, and this can fall
into the umbrella of Spanglish, right? There are people who grew up speaking both English
and Spanish and mixing the two all the time, right? We'll talk about that later.
Educated speakers will talk differently than uneducated speakers. And again, that's not
a value judgment. It's just some people have spent way too much damn time in school and
other people haven't. Then people from urban areas will speak differently from people in
rural areas. All of these things turn out to be very important. Then nerds have their
own sorts of things and so on and so on forever. And all of us are a mix of these identities.
I am someplace between young and old, except when it comes to memes, in which case, old.
I identify as male. I am not a speaker of AV or I'm not Latino or Chicano in any way.
I'm way too educated for my own damn good. Relatively urban. I'm a gigantic nerd. And
all of this kind of comes together to create my own, my own self.
But this is the idea of a sociolect. These are social dialects, a dialect that is shared
among members of a certain social group. And people can have influence from many of these
sociolects at the exact same time. And we often switch around a little bit when we're
in different social situations. Right now, I am in my professor voice, flat out, full
on professor voice. I am being educated. I am trying my best to be. And I hate these
terms, but I'm being very clear in my speech. I'm hyper articulating. This is a term I'm
fine with. I'm making a lot of effort to make sure that I'm articulating clearly and cleanly.
Kind of thing. I'm also using relatively high register. That is, I'm using words that are
a little bit fancier. I'm using words like sociolect. And so as a result, right now I'm
in my nerd voice. But I can definitely turn that off. Can I? Yeah, if I'm just talking
like I might in my everyday life, I'm going to be sounding a little bit different than
I really am right now. Damn it, it's coming back. But still, yeah, we have all of these
different things going on. And the fact is, using my sociolect is a certain affiliation
with a certain identity. For instance, there might be times in which, for whatever reason,
and this is kind of a natural part of how humans work, where I really want to feel masculine.
And so I might do things like lower my voice a little bit. I might articulate a little
bit less. This is funny. You see this. If you stand outside an auto parts store and
you listen to people going in on either side of the door, it's different. The pitch drops
down a little bit. The articulation, yeah, I'm looking for a part for a Mercury Grand
Marquis or something like that. As I'm looking for a part for a Mercury Grand Marquis. A
little different. So sociolect is a thing. And there are many kinds of it. There are
many varieties of it. And some of these have prestige and other ones don't. What I want
to be very careful with is people saying, well, yeah, you're speaking a low-class sociolect
or something like that. I mean, yes, in society, some forms have prestige. This is a very newscaster-y
English that I use right here. It's something that's very similar to what you might hear
on a news program here in the U.S. But that doesn't mean it's more correct or more right.
It just has more prestige. And this varies depending on context. Because if I were to
speak in this way at, for instance, dinner with a bunch of family members, it would be
really pretentious. Right? It would be really weird. Or if I, you know, again, if I walk
into the auto parts store and I'm talking like this, it'd be kind of a little bit out
of place. But in a courtroom, absolutely. So it's important to think about this in terms
of prestige and context. Right? There are correct places to use any given dialect. And
it's just in the same way that it's not necessarily a great idea to be using, for instance, a
lesser-known dialect in a courtroom setting. It might be a really bad idea to use courtroom
English in a social gathering. Right? This kind of stuff is the bread and butter of sociolinguists.
These are people at the intersection of sociology, that is, and linguistics, who look at how
language and identity interact and how people in groups interact when it comes to language.
And, of course, people are able to switch among dialects and sociolects. This is a thing
that happens all the time. And people are called out on it usually as a form of attacking
them separately. But recently, Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez was accused of verbal blackface.
The idea here is, this is a linguistic thing. This is code switching. This is very, very
well known and it's something that happens all the time. People can switch back and forth
between dialects. They can be multi-dialectal. And it's perfectly natural that it's something
that they, and all of you can probably do this. Yet, so it's not fair to call somebody
out on this when it's one of their native dialects. Right? Because people can have many.
So, okay, within California, we have all kinds of things going on. And people from San Diego
are different. It's a thing. Right? And there are infinitely more groups. They all overlap.
And we are all influenced by many of these different things at the same time. But in
the middle there, we have this one little area, this one separate little dot. And that
dot is you. You are, and I mean this in the very best of ways, a unique snowflake. You
are unlike any other human in terms of your dialect. This is a beautiful thing about you
as a human. You have your own idiolect. Your idiolect is the way that you specifically
use language. This is your idiolect. These are your esoteric pronunciations. Maybe you
say the word, there is, the stuff that you buy, that you get at a, at a gas station,
you might say gasoline. Right? This isn't something that a lot of people do, but you
do. Or Vaseline is a similar thing that for some reason I say Vaseline. It's the petroleum
jelly personal care product. That's kind of esoteric. Maybe you have expressions and catch
phrases that you use more often. For me, but I digress. Or back at the ranch. These are
things that I use too damn much. Right? They're things that I use. They're things that I prefer.
Back when I was in middle school, I said zesty a lot. I'm judging too. It's okay. And then
you have specific meanings for words or phrases. If I say the word dog, think about what dog
is. I bet a lot of you are thinking about a specific dog, right? Maybe you're thinking
about a childhood dog. Maybe you're thinking about a friend's dog. Maybe you're thinking
about your current dog, or maybe if you don't have a dog, you're thinking about something
more generic. Maybe if you're scared of dogs, you're thinking of something big and scary
and mean, right? But dog has a specific meaning to each and every one of you. Meaning is a
part of your idiolect as well. And you also get all of the features that you've inherited
from your region. So growing up in Colorado, I have certain features, not many, but I do.
And I have certain features and words and phrases for my sociolect. Pardon me, I'm a
gigantic nerd. So I have Dungeons and Dragons players sociolectal features, right? You know,
it's a thing. I have twitch.tv features in my language, right? Feel free to drop the
kappas in chat. Now that'd be more of a poggers moment. Anyways, I digress. There are going
to be features that you have from all of these things. You have odd spellings and emojis.
How many of you still write LOL? That's probably a little old, right? So you'll probably prefer
the different emojis, but you'll have emojis you prefer. I like the discord colon joy colon.
That's a thing. My wife writes thanks with an X. Okay, whatever. Sure thing, honey. And
you have your writing style. You have a speech style. You have an individual set of speech
organs, right? This whole thing here is different for all of you. And this is going to change
the way that your speech sounds. You sound unique. You sound different from any other
human on earth. And that's itself really fascinating. And so even within you though, there is variation,
right? Because you sounded differently as a kid than you do now. You sound differently
when you're at work, say giving a lecture than you do when you're at home talking with
a friend, with a sweetie, with something like that. You sound different at 4 a.m. than
you do when you're on a date than you do when with a cold, et cetera. All of these things
make you sound different. If you call me at 4 a.m., I'm not going to bounce into full
professor voice. Hi there. How are you doing today? Would you like to come to office hours?
No, I'm not going to do that. In fact, I'm going to be like, what are you doing? Why
are you calling me at 4 a.m.? And screw you. It's going to be different. So you have different
parts at any given time. But the thing is, it goes worse, right? Because let's say you're
on a date. If you're trying to be seductive, you're going to talk differently than if you're
trying to act smart as you're trying to feel awkward at 4 a.m. with a cold. All of those
things are going to make this harder. All of these things are going to make it more
complex. And by the way, talking about speaking seductively, here's a fun one. Yeah, I'm going
to go there. Why not? So one of the things that you can do to sound seductive is to move
to a breathier voice. So right now I'm being a little bit more breathy. My voice is not
fundamentally different, but I'm just adding a little bit more airflow as we're talking
here. And so as a result, it can sound a little bit more seductive. It can sound a little
bit more ASMR for that matter too. But why is that a thing? Why is that seductive? Well,
partly it's social, right? We've decided that this is how you sound if you want to be a
little bit seductive. But more importantly, it's physiological. When you are aroused,
and I mean physically aroused, one of the things that happens is that mucus membranes
start to overproduce mucus. Hey, I know this is romantic, right? And one of the consequences
of this is that the vocal folds, which we'll talk about next time, which are the things
that are actually vibrating here, get mucus on them and then you sound breathier. So when
you do this thing, when you talk about, hey honey, how are you doing tonight? And you
go a little breathier, you are simulating physical arousal. Yeah. So next time you hear
that, just be like, oh, I know what you're doing. And it's effective. And it's become
a social thing, right? So anyways, all of these things just keep going deeper and deeper
because you can try and be seductive while having a cold. Oh, how are you doing tonight?
And it's just, it's problematic. So this leads us to an interesting realization, which is
that language is fractal. This is a fractal. It is a pattern that goes on and on and on
and on and down and down and on and on and down forever and ever and ever and ever and
ever. And as you keep going, you keep finding more detail, not less. The pattern doesn't
get simpler. It just keeps going deeper and deeper and deeper. Language is fractal. First
you see really large patterns like, wow, there are these language families, all of these
families, all of these languages like Spanish and Italian and French. God, they do a lot
of things similarly. I guess they all must be related. Then you go a little deeper. You
say, wow, but this Spanish thing is working a little bit differently than all the rest
of those. And so then you go a little bit deeper. Interesting. So Spanish from Mexico
and Spain sounds a little bit different. And so does, here's Columbia. And so these words
aren't present in this region. Okay, well let's think about Mexico. Oh God, within Mexico,
there are words that happen here, but not here. And in Chihuahua, you get Chihuahua
rather than Chihuahua. And so then you get deeper. Oh wow. Within this city, you see
different people and the nerds are talking and you just keep going deeper and deeper.
Language is fractal. You keep finding more detail as you go further down and down and
down until the point when you get to a human and then even still you go deeper because
humans are in contexts. So language is fractal and it's very, very hard to find clear lines
between anything. It's hard to define what is a single language. You know, is Arabic
one thing? That's actually really tough to say, right? Because different Arabics spoken
around the world are very different. They will have different fundamental properties.
Yet at the same time, they're all understandable, but only through the writing system. A speaker
of Moroccan Arabic can't understand a speaker of Saudi Arabic necessarily unless they're
familiar. So are those one language? I don't know, maybe. And the difference between language
and dialect is very often a political difference. Saying these are all one language is because
you want to unite these people and saying, well, I don't know, these are two different
languages, that's very political. And so if you like them, they'll speak a dialect
of your language, otherwise it's a whole different beast, right? And everybody speaks at least
one dialect, at least one sociolect, and everyone has an idiolect, right? But people's dialects
and sociolects, there are many of them, right? And especially for somebody who's grown up
in many places, you will end up with features from many places and this will become a part
of your idiolect. And all of these things overlap in complicated ways. And this is a
reason why social elements of language have an entire subfield, right? Sociolinguistics
is a thing for a very, very good reason. But yeah, so this is the socio world. And we try
to divide this variation up a little bit. We talk about different languages as if that
were a clear distinction. We talk about different dialects as if that were clear, as sociolects
and idiolects, but we're generalizing to survive. And dialects are a form of language used by
a certain social or geographical group. And a sociolect is socially specific. It's not
necessarily geographic. And your idiolect is your unique way down kind of at the single
person level. And all of this is variable situation to situation, word to word. And
as you look closer and closer, you find more patterns, more complexity rather than less.
So let's check your knowledge. I can tell Pat's really sent the text. She always uses
the shrug emoji. Is this an example of a dialect, sociolect, idiolect, or emojiolect?
One of the downsides of doing these videos as videos is that I don't get as many chances
to drink. Usually any questions and then I drink. No. Okay, so Pat sent this text. Pat
is an individual person in this case. And if you know that Pat always uses the shrug
emoji, this would be an example of something that only Pat does or that Pat really does
strongly. So it's one person, so it's an idiolect feature. So there you go. Thing is though,
linguists are interested in how everybody talks. We talked about this a little bit on
the first day. We're not just interested in one dialect, not just the prestige dialect,
the dialect that has the most prestige in the culture. And we're not interested in a
correct variety. There are linguists who believe these kinds of things, but by and large they're
not, yeah. And we're not interested in just the academic dialect, because there is an
absolute academic dialect. Enjoy it. But they're not interested in the mainstream, because
mainstream U.S. English is a thing, right? If you watch a national broadcast, by and
large people will be speaking a mainstreamish U.S. English. And by the way, I will be using
muse, M-U-S-E, mainstream U.S. English, to refer to this over and over again. But nonetheless,
we're not just interested in what's in textbooks, in what's in dictionaries. We are interested
in everything. And as such, linguists, generally speaking, don't believe in a correct variety
of language. We don't believe that there is one way of talking that is the correct answer,
that is the right way to talk. It's very hard to pin down which one would be correct. And
I encourage you to use this against these trolls. If somebody's saying, oh, that's not
correct, you say, oh, okay, great, who's correct? Which region is correct? Oh, mine. Which dialect
is correct? Uh, mine. Which sociolect? I don't even know what that word is, but mine. Which
idiolect? Well, still me. Ultimately, they end up telling you that they're the only one
who can be right. Anyways, I digress. Um, idiolect. The situationally correct or appropriate
variety is all about social context. And by saying something like, that variety is not
what we want here, it's not the same thing as saying that variety is bad. And this is
actually really complicated, right? We don't talk about this when you're doing writing.
For instance, if you're in an English class or a linguistics class and you're doing some
writing, you might get docked points for saying, this is, don't use this word here. It might
feel like that word is incorrect, but really the way we should be thinking about this is,
in an academic setting, that word is not generally used. That variety is not generally used.
And so, it's not great, but it's something that we do have to pay attention to, because
like it or not, if you want to be taken seriously in academia, there are parts of the academic
dialect you need to be familiar with. But remember that correct is a social judgment.
Correct is about people, not about language. This is social. So as a result, we end up
thinking about grammar differently than a lot of English professors do. Um, so let's
think about grammar for a second. It's grammar time and this is a really old reference. Enjoy.
So what is grammar? What are we talking about when we talk about grammar? Well, let's get
there. Prescriptive and descriptive are two different types of grammar. What do those
actually mean? Well, speakers of a language have intuitions about what grammar is, right?
So we did this a little bit last time, but which one of these is a grammatical English
sentence? So A is John went with Tina to the cat show. B is the boy flame take Watchingsley.
C is correct horse battery staple. D is a store as you own noise English and E is you're
not sure. So which one of these sentences is ungrammatical? I'm sorry, which of these
sentences is grammatical? Only one of these chances are is going to be grammatical, although
the last one is if you're not sure. Okay.
For most people speaking English, this is going to be a pretty easy answer, right? A
is probably going to be the correct answer. John went with Tina to the cat show. This
gets at the idea of descriptive grammar. These are the rules of the language, dialect, and
sociolect that are being spoken that describe how people actually talk or write. Um, if
I look at the phrase, um, boy, the boy flame take Watchingsley, this is ungrammatical.
There is no dialect in which that's okay. In fact, it doesn't even make any sense. Um,
this is not in harmony with the local rules. Whereas a grammatical sentence is, there is
no local set of rules that makes that okay. People will stumble over ungrammatical sentences.
The boy flame take Watchingsley is not something that people are ready to say. It doesn't make
sense. You would never say that when something is descriptively ungrammatical, it's often
very hard to understand. Like, what does this mean? I have absolutely no idea what that
sentence would even start to mean. So that is descriptively ungrammatical. Although it's
worth saying that there are definitely hard to understand sentences that are perfectly
grammatical, often found in academic writing. Let's be real here, but okay. Uh, one thing
to note though, is that, uh, we as linguists and throughout the rest of the quarter, we're
going to mark an ungrammatical sentence with a star. So this means this sentence is ungrammatical.
I know it's ungrammatical. So there you go. And we will mark questionable sentences with
a question mark. So which friends has Thomas painted a picture of them? For some people,
that's going to be okay. It's probably not for most. This might be a star for everybody.
This is called a resumptive pronoun at the end. Most people aren't cool with that, but
nonetheless, um, yeah, the asterisk means ungrammatical. The question mark means this
is kind of borderline, right? So, okay. We know that this thing here is ungrammatical.
The boyflame takes Watchingsley, ungrammatical. Um, not okay. Um, the dialects and sociolects
and idiolects are all going to have their own grammar and they're all going to follow
it, right? This is a really important thing to consider because there are different dialects
out there. So Av, African American Vernacular English, also, like I said, previously known
as Ebonics, um, has something called negative concord. You can say something like, can't
nobody say he don't work. And what this means is that if I were to translate this, this
would be, uh, nobody can say he doesn't work. In my dialect, I would say, nobody can say
he doesn't work. But in Av, you can tell which term I was raised with, unfortunately. Um,
you can, uh, you say, can't nobody say he don't work. This is the correct version and
saying this is marked. This is not okay in this dialect. So this is correct. This is
the accurate version for this dialect. And this one is not. Nobody can say he doesn't
work would be wrong. Habitual be is another feature of Av, right? He be driving all over
the place is how I would say he often drives all over the place lately. Um, this is actually
a fundamentally different kind of way of expressing a meaning than, than we've got here. He be
driving all over the place means, you know, wow, very regularly. And in the recent history
here, he's been driving everywhere. Um, and so saying he often drives all over the place
lately would be ungrammatical in Av and then copula deletion. She mean this would be equivalent
to my she's mean. And again, if I'm in that context, this would be incorrect. This would
be ungrammatical. This would be incorrect. And this is the correct form in Av. So all
of these grammatical rules that I've given you here are followed carefully by speakers
of Av. Pardon me. If you speak this language, you will follow these rules. There will be
negative concord. There will be habitual be, and there will be copula deletion. All
of these things will be a factor, but this is followed carefully by these speakers, by
speakers of Av. And so it is false. It is wrong. It is incorrect. And it is usually
biased or motivated by other kinds of bias to say that speakers of Av or Chicano English
or Southern English have no grammar. It is incorrect to say that they have no grammar
or bad grammar. No, wrong. Damn it. That is incorrect. They use the grammar of their dialect
as carefully as you use the grammar of yours. And so this is important to remember. The
grammar of a dialect may be different from your own, but that doesn't mean it's wrong.
It just means it's different. Let's try a different set of grammar judgments. Which
of these sentences is grammatical English? So A, I never know what I should write with.
B, I don't know who she photographed. C, Ron and Jerry stayed home last night. D, we
hope to considerably advance machine learning technology. Or E, I'm not sure. Think about
this one for a second.
Okay, this one was probably harder, right? A, I never know what I should write with.
This, well, let's just go this way. According to a lot of folks, C is the only right answer.
We could go with this regularly, but C is the only right answer for some. This is because
of prescriptive grammar, made up social rules that prescribe how people should, or prescribe
how people should talk or write. Prescriptive grammar gives us rules that are being violated
here. I never know what I should write with is supposed to be incorrect because never
end a sentence with a preposition. Or put differently, a preposition is a terrible thing
to end a sentence with. Next, I don't know who she photographed. Technically, we should
be using whom there, because the who there refers to the direct object. So that should
be whom. That should be an accusative case pronoun. There you go. D, we hope to stunningly
advance machine learning technology. This bit here bothers a lot of people. How dare
you split an infinitive? People give this Star Trek to boldly go where no one, yeah,
dude. So these are the complaints that we get here. Now, here's another question. Do
you know what this sentence means? Do you know what A means? Do you know what B means?
Do you know what D means? Did you understand the sentence? Did you have any question at
all as to what I was saying to you in these sentences? Any ambiguity? Little tiny bit?
No. You understood. And so chances are, all of the sentences I gave you in this second
clicker question were pretty straightforward for you to understand. And all of the ones
that I gave you in the first one were tricky, except the one that was grammatical, right?
All the other ones didn't make any damn sense. If I say correct horse battery staple, that's
not English. That's an XKCD reference. It's not English. And so it's more difficult to
talk about sentences that are descriptively ungrammatical and to understand them than
sentences that are prescriptively ungrammatical. So these rules, the rules I was just talking
about, never end a sentence with a preposition, or oh, you should use whom there, or oh, don't
split an infinitive. These are social rules. These are things that people have made up.
And given all grammar rules are made up to the extent that they're arbitrary, right?
But these are ones that specific people have decided, I'm going to say this is a problem,
when a bunch of people do them. They're not universally observed. If they were, no one
would complain about them, right? Look, okay, all sentences should have verbs. This is not
a rule that people yell at people about on the internet, right? Why? Because everybody
puts verbs in sentences. This is a strong descriptive rule of English grammar. No one
messes it up, so no one complains about it, right? But these things, people mess up all
the time, which gives people on the internet, oh, it gives them the opportunity to do that
kind of thing. These rules do not affect your ability to be understood, generally. There
are very, very few cases in which these actually cause any ambiguity. And the ambiguity is
generally very short. And they are often based in some kind of a written ambiguity.
Like this trio, there, there, and there. Those are the same damn word in pronunciation, but
we write them three different ways because the English writing system is a flaming dumpster
of garbage and medical waste. So we use this written ambiguity, like, oh, you used the
wrong there. No, it's the same damn word, quiet. Or maybe they're different damn words,
but we can't tell. They're often quoted from one specific source. Strunk and white is the
one that most people make fun of. I'm sorry, most people reference, I make fun of. Anytime
someone says strunk and white, start laughing, right? This is one particular codification.
This is one particular grumpy white guy, well, two actually, but still, that are codifying
these rules and claiming that they are true, that they are actually a thing. And they're
very often associated with a specific setting, right? If you were to do some weird avoidance
to avoid splitting an infinitive, it would probably come off weird in many settings,
right? So a lot of people think, oh, linguists, God, I better watch my grammar. No, don't.
I'm watching it. That's fun. I'm here to describe things. I hate grammar Nazis. I really,
truly, deeply do. They drive me crazy and I love messing with them because, yeah. So
I, linguists are not the same thing as grammarians. We are very fundamentally different. And I'm
sure you can all think of different prescriptive grammar rules that you're familiar with, right?
You can think of something else that somebody on the internet has yelled at you for. You
have to capitalize the first word of a sentence. No, you don't. Half of, anybody under 25 doesn't,
right? It's, and in Germany, you have to capitalize every damn word. You just made this up. Let's,
so these are social. So, okay, let's think about this rule a little bit more. Which of
these rules is a descriptive rule? Oh, damn it. Well, let's see if he can figure it out, right?
All right. So A is saying I'll make do rather than I'll make do with the, the, the spelling
difference. B is all sentences must include a verb. C says always include punctuation inside
the quote. D says in-text citations should be surrounded by parentheses. And E is emojis
cannot be used in professional correspondence. Well, the answer was probably a little bit
easier because I used this as an example early on, forgetting that this was a question I
was going to ask you later on. But still, B is the answer. I'll make do with a D-U-E
rather than D-O is a writing distinction, right? We have decided that we're going to
write those two things differently. But again, that's because our, our writing system is
just a toxic pit of sass and hatred. It's terrible. C, always include the punctuation
inside the quote. This is completely arbitrary, right? There is absolutely no reason that
the period should go inside or outside the quote, except that somebody decided that was
going to be a thing. D, in-text citations should be surrounded by parentheses. No, it's
not, academics can't even agree on this. If everybody used one system, then okay, maybe,
but no. It's like, oh, we're using MLA or APA or Chicago. All of these damn things are,
style guides drive me nuts. And then E, emojis cannot be used in professional correspondence.
Watch me. I will do so. This is just somebody saying, well, I don't like emojis because
I don't understand what the little eggplant thing that people keep using to make fun of
me is. Sorry. Um, and so this is very much a social rule. How about this? Which of these
sentences is descriptively ungrammatical? Me and Mark are going clubbing. I hate polar
bears. Their paws are too big. Frank, Suzanne live Dallas. Herbert ain't gone to the store
yet. Michael Bay loves to desecrate good cartoons. Think about it for a second. Okay, so the
answer that I would say is correct here is C Frank, Suzanne live Dallas. So a would be
considered ungrammatical by some because me and Mark should be Mark and I. Okay, sure.
Case of the pronoun, whatever. Okay. Um, B I hate polar bears. Their paws are too big.
That's the wrong usage. The wrong usage of there. Even though they're pronounced the
same, we've decided they need to be written differently. So that's ungrammatical, but
that's a prescriptive ungrammatical issue. D Herbert ain't gone to the store yet. People
say ain't, ain't a word. It's a word. Sorry to say that. It's a thing. And then finally
E does a whole bunch of things. Interestingly with spelling includes a two there instead
of a two T O. Yeah, you can do it that way. You all understood exactly what I meant. Um,
both in terms of his love and in terms of the sentence. Uh, and that's there. But then
C Frank, Suzanne live Dallas. You're missing something there. Um, unless this is like
a movie poster, Frank, Suzanne live Dallas. This doesn't fly right. This should be Frank
and Suzanne. We're missing a conjunction in the middle there and we're missing a preposition.
Maybe live in Dallas, live near Dallas or maybe Frank. Suzanne is a person and so it
should be Frank. Suzanne lives in Dallas or Frank. Suzanne live in Dallas. There's something
missing there. We don't understand what this means as speakers. It's impossible to say.
You can kind of take some guesses, but it's impossible to say what this one means. All
of these other ones are perfectly understandable. So this is descriptively ungrammatical. The
other ones are prescriptively ungrammatical. Those are different. So linguists are interested
in descriptive grammar. We don't believe there's a correct variety. I probably have gotten
this across to you already. Um, and a rule that a large number of people don't follow
isn't actually a rule, right? Uh, seriously, if you don't have a bunch of people following
the law, it's not a law. Um, or it's not a rule in all of the dialects. It may be a rule
that's present in your dialect, but it's probably not a rule that's present elsewhere. And if
you speak a nonstandard variety of English, we as linguists think that's awesome. Absolutely
100% never feel hesitant to speak your native variety with me. Uh, I, I, you know, I might
struggle from time to time cause I'm a human, right? I might not understand elements of
it, but please, your nonstandard variety is awesome. 100%. The other thing I want to highlight
is that it's really fun to see when these prescriptive corrections are made. There are
people in the world who truly believe that these rules are real. They have been raised
by Strunk and White. They believe that the APA style guide was passed down from a mountain
from the heavens and it was taken and they looked and they saw that URLs must be cited
in this way and it was good. Um, there are the people out there who are true believers
and in their case, very often they think, oh, well, if you want to be taken seriously,
you need to speak English correctly and these rules help you be correct. And so maybe there's
a, there can be a little bit of goodness in that. And just like I want you to have a good
experience in the world and speaking good English could be helpful for that. And at
some level that's adorable. Like, oh, it's sweet. You don't know. Um, oftentimes they
are trying to help. Um, and this is the way that you can frame this. I'm not going to
sit here and say that I'm never going to highlight an area where I, where there was a grammatical
mistake or a typo in an essay. But the way you should think about that is if you need
to be taken seriously in this context, you're going to need to talk like this. It is not
the case that saying, for instance, okay, let's think about Av. A very, uh, the Trayvon
Martin case, uh, the, without getting too deeply into it, um, there was a court case
involved, uh, with this shooting. And, uh, one of the, uh, witnesses was given all kinds
of terrible treatment because she was speaking Av in a courtroom, uh, and speaking, uh, very
canonical Av. And as a result, a lot of people had trouble understanding her. So it's okay
to say in that context, Av might not have been the best choice, but it's not okay to
say that Av is bad or she was speaking incorrectly. You know, it's important to think about this
as in terms of context, she had a little bit more trouble being understood by some people
in the room because she was speaking Av, but that's different from saying she was wrong.
She spoke bad English or you can hardly understand this woman. Context. Um, sometimes and most
often people are trying to show their superiority. Oh my God, you bring an argument before me
yet you cannot master even basic grammatical structure. You fool. Um, you know, if you
watch the big bang theory, this is Sheldon, right? Uh, you're, you're just trying to put
somebody down by showing intellectual superiority and they believe at some deep level in their,
in their sad little hearts that telling somebody which version of there they should be using
right there is, is crucial to that mission. Right? Um, and so that can definitely be a
thing and frustratingly often people do these kinds of corrections because attacking people's
language is used as a covert way of attacking people. This is a story older than time itself.
So very, very often people will use attacks on language to disguise attacks on people,
to attack, uh, to disguise attacks on a group, on a race, on a culture, and they will just
talk about the language because that feels more acceptable for some reason in our society
than saying it directly. Saying somebody needs to teach these inner city, inner city
is a dog whistle by the way, we'll maybe talk about those a little bit later on, but teach
these inner city kids, and a dog whistle by the way is a phrase that often portrays an
opinion even though it's not made explicit. In this case it tends to be a pretty racist
term against usually black people. Uh, when people say inner city, that's generally what
you understand that to mean and very often the people who are using that have a negative
opinion of black people. It's not universal of course, and you can talk about the inner
city versus the outer city, but very often that's used in that way. But you can say something
like somebody needs to teach these inner city kids to be more articulate. Be more articulate
is another one of those words that's used all the time. Oh, you know, they said I'm
not very articulate is just like a way of saying they said they don't talk, or I don't
talk like they do. But this is just an attack on a group of people that's disguised as an
attack on language. You'll hear, you're in America, learn to speak English right. We
all know why somebody's saying this. It's not at all about English, right? And very
often this comes about after somebody has said a perfectly cogent English sentence to
them. You're so shrill, you should be more ladylike in your speech. Somebody is not saying
this because they're having trouble understanding. They're not saying this because anything.
They're saying this because this is code for shut up woman. Let's be real here. This
is really unfortunate. So when you see things like this, that's an attack on the person
rather than attack on the language. I heard this from a relative. He's a nice boy with
reference to another relative. He's a nice boy, but why does he have to talk so Mexican?
And then of course there's the trope. Damn millennial girls, although actually you can
put Gen Z here and it's still true. Damn millennial girls filling their speech with
whatever everyone's already doing. You know, you get like creaky voice, for instance, is
a, you know, this is canonically people make fun of it with like, Oh, let's go to the mall
where you go to the, ah, at the bottom there. But I do it too. You're hearing creaky voice
in my language all the time. I right there. That's Creek. We all do creaky voice, but
everyone yelled at millennials about that for a while, right? Or we all use emoji. We
have, everybody's use it, but then, Oh, these damn kids communicate only with their emojis.
And it's just, it's just angry people yelling at people for things that they do too. So
of course, you know, this is a thing. Attacking people's language is often used as a covert
way of attacking people. And when you see somebody attacking language, ask yourself,
what's really going on here? It's not all like that. And I think a lot of people do
mean well, a lot of people were just raised believing that there is one correct English.
There is one correct dialect and that somebody doing otherwise is incorrect. But very, very
often when you see these things, it's for a reason. So this is why long story short,
why linguists don't like being called grammarians. We are fundamentally different. It's why we
spend so much time, an entire lecture, basically talking about the difference between descriptive
and prescriptive grammar in Ling 101. And it's why we're going to spend the rest of
the quarter talking about descriptive grammar rather than talking about prescriptive grammar.
This is the last time we're going to mention, you know, splitting infinitives or ending
a sentence with a preposition. That's not a thing anymore. We're going to be talking
about the elements of language or the mistakes, for instance, made in language that make something
difficult to understand, that make it sound not like English, that make people unable
to understand what's going on rather than the things that people, the social judgments
that people make about other people's language.
So to wrap up here, language is fractal. It's got huge amounts of variation across every
different level, from the highest level of language families all the way down to individual
peoples during the course of their day. We subdivide that variation into dialects, into
sociolects and idiolects. Wow, that was a weird pronunciation. Idiolects. There we go.
It's hard to identify a correct variety. That's a social thing, more or less. Descriptive
rules describe what's actually being said. A descriptive rule talks about how African
American vernacular English actually works rather than saying this is how it should work.
Prescriptive rules are saying what somebody thinks should be said. That is the fundamental
difference there. Linguists care about descriptive grammars and don't tend to buy into prescriptive
rules. And that's all really important and something to keep in mind and that we will
carry through throughout the rest of the quarter.
So as you're looking at this, as you're looking at language variations, you're looking at
language differences, ask yourself what are we seeing here? Is this a prescriptive rule,
a descriptive rule, or maybe something's a little ambiguous there. For next time, if
you're reading the book, go ahead and read the chapter on phonetics and we will dive
into speech and how that works. Thank you all very much and have an absolutely wonderful
rest of your day.
