Hi, everybody. Today I'd like to talk with you and do our second presentation about phonetics.
And in this case, we're going to do things a little bit differently. We are going to
talk a little bit more about IPA transcription, going deeper into what this task actually
is. We'll talk about why IPA is useful for anybody, and then we'll have a little bit
of phonetic fun. So now we understand how speech sounds are being produced, right? This
is really important for understanding how all of these things are. We can use this
information to identify the symbols in the IPA, and we can transcribe speech using the
IPA. Again, remember, online audio charts are a really useful resource, and IPAcharts.com
is trash, so do be careful about that. But first off, let's dust off the IPA brain a
little bit. The word thickened. Thickened. How many places of articulation are present
in this word? Thickened. Thickened. And let's just put aside the vowels. So one, two, three,
four, or 1,337. So the correct answer here is this. We have th, th is interdental, k
is velar, n is alveolar, and d is alveolar. So the answer is three. Okay, how about manners
of articulation? Same thing. Th, k, n, d. Thickened. 1, 2, 3, or 4. Th, k, n, d. Okay,
so th, air is escaping, but it's making sound because of friction. That makes it a fricative.
K, k, k stops the airflow. So it's a stop. N, n, n, n. There's sound coming out my nose.
It's a nasal. Amazing. And then d stops the sound. So again, the answer here is three.
Fricative, stop, and nasal. And then how many of these are voiced? So one, two, three,
or four of those consonants. Th, k, n, d. Th, k, n, d. That's right. Th and k are voiceless.
N and d are voiced. So two of those sounds are voiced. So your discussion sections actually
aren't so much of a thing. What I actually meant to say here is the class session this
week is all about transcription. But slightly different thing. You'll get more experience
with it there in class, with us there to help you. So don't worry too much about that. You'll
get some time. But before we go further, I want to talk about some pitfalls of transcription.
Remember that your writing system is a giant dirty liar. So the letter C doesn't exist.
We already talked about that. But in every instance, it's a K, an S, or a ch sound. The
ng sound, the NG at the end of a word is not an N or a G. So it's usually a ng sound, as
in ring, ring, ring. It's a single nasal, right? It's a velar nasal. Your tongue is
up at the back of your mouth. The sound is going out of your nose and it's voiced. So
it's a voiced velar nasal. Ring, sing. It's not ring, sing. There's no G involved. It's
just a nasal at the end there.
The th sound. Everybody say this thistle, this thistle, this thistle. Th, that's voiced.
Th is voiceless. So there are two different sounds here. One of these, the theta, is voiceless.
The other, the ev, is voiced. So that can be two different sounds, neither which is
a T or an H. The X in the writing system is usually a KX, or a KS, that is, as in axis,
axis. Or for instance, axe. Like, I swung an axe. Axe. So it's not a ch, which is what
this is in the IPA. If you give me an X in the IPA in slashes, you're giving me ch, as
in challah bread, or something like that. And then English does not allow double consonants.
This is just one L here. It's not a thing. So soccer has two, I'm sorry, has two Cs,
but it has one K. Or crass just has the single S in it. If you give me two Ks there, you're
giving me sock-cur, sock-cur, or something like that, and that's not correct. Don't do
it, please. And then finally, do not capitalize when making IPA transcriptions. It's just
going to give you pain. Because capital letters aren't a thing in the IPA. IPA is all lowercase,
and in many cases, a capital letter. So for instance, the English R is an upside-down
R. The Spanish R is a right-side-up R, and a capital R is the uvular R, R, R, although
actually that's usually smaller. But still, having both capital and small caps letters
in IPA does mean something entirely different. There are other lies that the writing system
tells you. Those final Ds are very often Ts. So sliced, rather than sliced. Sliced. Not
a thing. Buzzed. That one is actually a D. Close, close, close, as in, oh, I, you know,
she's pretty close, I'll just swing by and get it. As opposed to close, as in, honey,
could you close that door for me? I'm filming a class. Those, one has an S, one has a Z.
Very different things. Silent letters aren't real. So the K in knee hasn't been real for
many hundreds of years. It used to be. It used to be knee, but no longer is. The B in
lamb isn't a thing. It's not lamb, lamb. So don't give me lamb in transcriptions, please.
If you give me the M, or I'm sorry, if you give me the E in name, I'm going to cry, right?
It's not name anymore. Used to be, isn't anymore. And there is no I in team, but actually,
there is an E in team. So feel free to show this, you know, show this to your coach. They'll,
I'm sure, appreciate it, and in no way make you run laps. So there's that.
Another thing to remember is that words don't have a single IPA equivalent. You are always
transcribing somebody else saying them. As such, there is no such thing as an automatic
IPA translator, and there never could be. Some dictionaries will give you the IPA for
a word, but it'll do it badly. And some websites will do that as well. Every single quarter
I give this speech, there are not websites that will give you answers for IPA. And every
single quarter, somebody goes online and does IPA word equivalent thing. They find an online
IPA site, and then they turn in their homework using answers from that. And then suddenly
they're giving me very strange British pronunciations that aren't actually British, and the students
aren't actually British. Or they're giving me weird things that are completely incorrect
because they're using some weird offshoot of the IPA. And every quarter, those people
fail homework one. And they don't get the opportunity to drop it. So please, please,
please, just do the work honestly. Work with somebody. Come to office hours. We are here
to help. But when you go online and you find an IPA website, it is super duper apparent
to us, and it is super duper cheating. And that's not okay. And by the way, that's the
least that can happen to them is failing that homework. So don't use those sites. It just
won't help you. We will notice. You will be caught. It will be sad. I hate doing those
lectures or those talks with people. So, okay, next thing is that some symbols don't
mean the same things that they do in English. So the Y IPA character is actually a French
E, E, E. We don't have this sound in English, although did, did is getting pretty close
to it, right? But nonetheless, E is not present in English. So don't use Y in English. The
Y sound is the one that you want. Voice palatal approximate as in, yes, this is the sound
you want. Not that one. The R sound is a voiced alveolar trill, the Spanish rolled R. That
is a R as opposed to the English R, which is upside down, R, R, R. So unless you really
mean to be transcribing red, you're probably going to want to use this one rather than
that one. Just saying. So, okay, those are some of the common pitfalls. And again, pay
attention to that quick reference sheet. I spent hours on that and I want you to have
it. I want you to use it. I want it to be good for you. But at the same time, you're
probably wondering, well, okay, I get it. Yeah, we need to do IPA. You're teaching
us IPA. Why, why do you make us suffer so well? Well, the answer is because it's useful.
Um, there are a couple of boring answers. I mean, to start with the IPA makes you think
about not just what you're saying, but how you're saying it, how you talk. It makes
you think about what's going on in the world. And so that's really useful. It makes you
think about your mouth in a more critical way. It also prepares you for future linguistics
classes because all of your Ling classes will use the IPA. It's just a fact of life. Um,
it will happen. And you can also now work for an airport announcing names. Oddly enough,
this is one of the few job descriptions outside of, for instance, operas, where you also need
to learn to sing in languages you don't speak. Um, so IPA is used there, but, uh, one of
the few jobs where IPA is useful, because if you're an airport announcer and somebody
calls and says, I need you to page, um, you know, somebody, and then they give you a name
that you're not familiar with. You write it down on IPA and you speak it back in IPA and
no one knows any better, right? This is super helpful, but there are better reasons for
this. One of them is that your writing system probably sucks. If you're an English speaker,
your writing system definitely sucks. It absolutely sucks beyond any shadow of a doubt. The suction
of the English writing system would make everybody at Dyson vacuums, corporate headquarters,
jealous because, Oh my God, this suck is huge. But nonetheless, um, the writing system that
you're using in any language is probably awful. We talked about this one already in English,
but if we look at this in IPA, they thoroughly, so this is thoroughly here.
Cause we didn't say, and roughly it's thoroughly and roughly, roughly rot. Oh, that's right. Uh,
and, uh, are spelled the same way. The bows in the burrow through and through. This is way simpler
than this train wreck of OUGH, right? So the writing system sucks. And chances are,
if you're working with another language, that writing system is disguising facts about the
language too, right? This is a common thing that happens. Uh, writing systems are written
with a good sense of contrast. We'll talk more about that next time in phonology, but we
understand even a really well done writing system by a linguist will very often make
conveniences that will hide the nature of the speech sounds. So the IPA tells us what sounds
are there rather than what's meaningful. So to speak, although we can get back and forth with
that a little bit more, we'll talk about that next week in phonology. Um, it's also useful to
be able to write things down, even when you don't know the words. So for instance, if you're doing
field work and somebody gives you the sound, you need to write that down. Uh, and if you're trying
to do that using, for instance, the English writing system, or perhaps even a local writing
system, presuming that there is a writing system involved, because remember, many languages around
the world are not written. That's okay. It doesn't make them any lesser. It just means that they
don't have a writing system yet. So you can write down very easily in the IPA, but it would be
impossible to do in any other writing system unless somehow that was, yeah, IPA is just easier.
So do that. Um, you don't always have a writing system to use. Uh, I already mentioned this.
You will also train your brain by doing the IPA to hear these differences more easily. It doesn't
feel like English has as many vowels as it does, but once you spend more time with the IPA, you
will get to that point where you do, you do feel that way. So you get the versus the, you now can
hear that difference a little bit better than before you knew that there was a difference,
right? And one of the ways that we learn that there's a difference is by using the IPA.
It also helps you capture individual variations in speech. And this can be really useful. Um,
especially if you go on down the road into a speech pathology field, but also in dialectology,
also in sociolinguistics. So for instance, my next door neighbor, when I was a kid, um,
was a really nice guy, but he had one very particular speech disorder, uh, which meant
that his S's always came out as lateral fricatives. So he would say, instead of sick, he would say
sick, sick. Um, you know, uh, you would meet somebody named Sam instead of Sam.
And so it was very difficult to figure out what was going on. But now that I know IPA,
it's just, Oh, he's using instead of. Nice, useful. Um, dialect differences are also a factor.
Let's think about received pronunciation or British English versus mainstream us English.
So one of these is British. One of these is American. Which one is which try and read it out
loud. So the first one we have, uh, Lou man, num, as opposed to all you men E. Um, so this is a big
difference in the UK. You have aluminium and in the U S you have aluminum. This is a major
difference in pronunciation. Kind of cool. Right? And in the IPA, we can actually see the difference
between those two things. Um, similarly in, uh, RP, we have garage as opposed to garage in America,
uh, in America, um, sorry, in mainstream us English, uh, garage versus garage.
And you can tell the difference between these again in the IPA, these little dots above the
words here, mark stress. We're not going to go deep into stress this quarter, but it's definitely
there. Don't let it stress you out. Uh, okay. All right. Um, remember we looked at this example,
sell your eye into Walter Zion, right? Um, in my dialect, uh, we have sell your iron to Walter
Zion, Zion. I, in this case, I actually gave it a Zion. I would probably end up saying Zion.
So that would be an aw much like this rather than an Schwab. But anyways, um, sell your eye
and to Walter Zion, as opposed to the, the, in the local dialect, you have sell your iron
to Walter Zion. And in fact, we can see here that this is the same ending as this. We can see the
rhyme in the IPA. You can see when something rhymes. This is cool. This is different. Boston.
Again, I'm having family from back East. You have to, so there's always the joke that, you know,
park the car in Harvard yard becomes pack the car in Harvard yard because Boston has what's
called a non-rhotic dialect. There is not the R sound in many of these cases. It's present in
other cases. It's not like, uh, what color is that ed? No, it's just, it's a non-rhotic dialects
lose ours in some cases and actually insert them in other cases. So park becomes park.
The becomes the car becomes car in Harvard yard. So we can see that in the IPA. You can also
impress and scare people at parties and bars. Hey, what's your, do you want to know what your
name in the IPA is? Probably not a great pickup line. Maybe it would work. I don't know. I'm
married somehow, right? Um, but nonetheless, uh, this is definitely effective. And then you can
write down things that aren't quite language in the IPA. So let's do a quick transcription exercise.
Um, uh, get ready. Um, you get ready to take some notes. I want you to transcribe the following.
I said, the hip hop, the hibbit, the hibbit, do the hip, hip hop,
or you don't stop the rock and do the bang, man. When you say up,
just the boogie to the rhythm of the boogie. Okay. Did you get that?
Probably not. So if you were to write this down in the English writing system,
you would see something more like this. I said a hip hop, the hibby, the hibby to the hip,
hip hop. And you don't stop the rocking to the bang, bang boogie. Say up, jump the boogie to
the rhythm of the boogie, the beat. I'm sorry. I just, uh, to the rhythm of the boogie, the beat.
Um, but that's not accurate here. Let's listen.
Yeah, we're missing a bunch of things, but if we do in the IPA, we can actually do a lot better.
So we get a set of, so it's not, I said a, it's a set of hip hop, the hibby, and it's not the
hibby. It's the hibby, the hibby. There's a little bit more of a gap there to the, it's not to the,
it's to the hip, hip, hoppy, uh, hoppy. You hear hip, hip, hoppy. You don't stop the rocking.
And again, it's not rocking. It's rocking to the, it's not to the, it's to the bang,
bang boogie say up, jump the boogie to the rhythm of the boogie, the beat. And it's not
the boogie, the beat it's rhythm of the boogie, the beat. And when you put all this together,
you get something that's much more fluid. I said a hip hop, the hibby, the hibby to the hip, hip,
hoppy. You don't stop the rock to the bang, bang boogie, see up, jump the boogie to the rhythm
of the boogie, the beat. And by that you can actually get something closer to the rap.
And that's awesome. Okay. Let's try this one.
One more time. Ready to transcribe.
Got it. Yeah, no. Um, this is something I transcribed when I was very bored in graduate
school and trying my best not to write a paper. Uh, and so, uh, we ended up with this one more
time. You can look at it here. So this area here in the middle, I feel a little bit bad about these
question marks. Um, but it turns out there isn't an IPA symbol for this because no Siri, I'm not
talking to you. Um, there isn't an IPA, uh, symbol for this because what, uh, Scott and John is
actually doing there. And I couldn't figure this out. I was, you know, trying to my best to hear
this. Uh, and then I watched the music video and found out that he was doing these things with his
fingers here, which would, I think technically be a labiodactyl trill. Anyways, it's a thing.
Um, and so, uh, that that's, what's going on here. The IPA allows you to transcribe anything,
not just language, not just speech. So all of this is why you're learning the IPA and that's
actually everything you need to know to complete the homework and to deal with the final exam in
this class about the IPA. Um, there is actually though one other misconception I'd like to
address about sounds. Generally speaking, that's really important. Um, one of the things that you
hear over and over again from often well-meaning people is that, Oh, well, people in Africa speak
only with clicks. Yeah. So this is wrong in a whole bunch of ways. This is bad, wrong. Um, and
so one thing to highlight is that Africa is a really big place, right? Um, you know, that there
are lots of native English speakers in Africa and not just in South Africa. There are entire
countries whose main language is English, right? Just throwing that out there. Anyways, Africa is
a big place and it is true. There is a family of languages, the Khoisan languages, um, that,
that use clicks extensively. They are there. They are present. They are a major part of the
language. This group of languages is spoken by about 400,000 people ballparking. Um,
the clicks have also been borrowed into a couple of other languages. Zulu and Xhosa, um, are both,
um, Bantu languages within Niger Congo, and they are, uh, about 17.6 million speakers. So
pretty big languages, right? But what this actually means statistically is that around 1%
of Africans speak a language where there is clicks. That's, that's it. And all of these
languages have a lot of non-clicky sounds. Here's a good example from YouTube of a Khoisan speaker.
So what we see there is that there are a lot of different sounds going on there,
but there are clicks. There are definitely clicks in there. And so this is one of the
clickiest, so to speak, languages out there, but there's still a lot more going on than just clicks.
So even though it may be shocking, I'd like to remind you, you could actually do this. Um,
so for instance, this is how to produce click sounds. You can watch that at your own leisure,
but anybody can pronounce any language. This is a truth of phonetics. Generally speaking,
speech organs are universal. There have certainly been theories in the past that have gotten into,
you know, Oh, well they can't produce a non-primitive language, but that's,
that's just racism. Um, there, there are not really meaningful differences between, uh,
your vocal tract and speakers of another language. Um, the only difference between
humans is practice. Mind you, it's much easier if you start off speaking a language,
you are more likely to achieve native-like proficiency if you grow up speaking a language,
right? Um, but there are no sounds that English speakers simply cannot produce with enough
practice. That doesn't mean it's easy. Some of these things can be very difficult. Um, so for
instance, let's try making a very common sound that's English adjacent, but isn't quite English.
The H sound. This is, uh, the sound is in Hanukkah or Challah or Bach, the composer.
H. This is a voiceless velar fricative. H. Try it. Hanukkah. Challah. Bach. And this is by the
way, why no one can properly spell Hanukkah on cards. There are just 50,000 letter combinations
and it's all because we don't use IPA and we don't, we can't even with H. Um,
voiced alveolar trill. Raa. Raa. Carro. Perro. Roto. That's a little weird, but still, um,
all of these things, the R sound is a difficult sound to make, but it's very, very possible
and you can learn to make one. Um, a voiceless palatal fricative is the sound that an angry cat
makes. A voiceless alveolar lateral fricative as in the word Nahwat. Nahwat. Nahwat is a
this is the sound, by the way, in Chipotle, um, that they don't say when we say Chipotle,
it should be Chipotle. Um, but nonetheless, we, so if you go to Chipotle, make sure to use it and
just scare them. Um, but anyways, Nahwat is a really cool language. Um, it's spoken,
it's an indigenous language of Mexico and it's not Nahwatl. Please, please not Nahwatl. Um,
and then, uh, try making a click between two vowels. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Give it a try.
Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa. Akwa.
And this is one of the things that you will do as a linguist as you go, for instance,
into grad school, chances are you'll be made to do a production exam where you will
be forced to try to make all of these various sounds. It's a cool thing. It helps it,
it makes it much easier to learn languages, but you can do it. I believe in you.
So IPA conclusion is that these should be two different slides, but for some things and
problematic. IPA is awesome. That's my conclusion for it. Um, and it's a great resource for you,
but it is also independently hard to figure out what to include in a Ling 101.
And so today I have abandoned good sense and tradition in favor of my own burning passions.
Um, and basically I'm going to say, screw it. We're talking about speech perception
because, oh my God, speech perception is amazing. Um, speech, as I've already mentioned,
is flapping bits of meat around in your head and throat while you expel air, right? That's fine.
Speech perception is turning those resulting vibrations in the air back into language,
back into knowledge that you can actually use back into words that people can understand.
So what are these vibrations actually look like? So if we were to take a microphone like this one,
and I were to say a word like sky, we would see the patterns of vibration. You would see this
little area right here is the S and then this bigger area here is the, uh, the, the vowel itself.
So S I, and then fading down. So we can see from the vibrations elements of that, but it's,
it's very difficult to read. And in fact, we can read them a little bit better. How do we pick
them up? Well, we use our ears. And if you're curious about how hearing works, you should take
Ling 113, uh, which is a hearing science class. Uh, and it's an amazing class. And, uh, you just
come talk to me after class sometime, if you're interested in enrolling in it and you haven't
had the fanatics class yet, but nonetheless, um, it, it vibrates the, your eardrum here,
and then goes through these little bones and then goes into the cochlea and then is picked
up by mechanisms that are just cool. Um, and then we get electrical signals inside of our brain,
um, that are roughly organized by frequency. And then, uh, magic happens and we understand,
oh, sky that thing up there. Yeah. Um, I, I skipped a step there. I agree. I absolutely
skipped a step and I should go back. The problem is that step is difficult. It takes a long time
to understand how little we understand. We get into some more of the complexity of speech
perception in a Ling 112 and 113 and a little bit in Ling 6, but from a computer perspective,
but speech perception is really hard. Um, you know, there are graduate seminars about that,
or at least I hope there will be again, because I love teaching that anyways. Um, I digress. Um,
speech perception is really difficult. So we're going to ignore exactly how it works and focus
on what's amazing about it. Um, and do a couple of little experiments. Let's do some speech
perception, magic tricks. One of the things that you never think about with your speech and with
your understanding of speech is that you're really used to understanding English, right?
You've gotten lazy. You can consistently hear word boundaries. If I say three cute penguins,
you understand that I did three things there. Lexically. I had three, I did cute. I had
penguins. Those are three different chunks, but you didn't ask yourself, what's a cute penguin.
I didn't know what that is or three cute pen wins. There's a Gwin. What's a Gwin. There's three cute
pen. And then there's a Gwin at the end there. Um, you hear these word boundaries. You can also
pick out mixing words from context because you understand the language, right? If I say,
for instance, um, uh, let's see, it was really out. So we didn't need to bring an umbrella.
You can understand that. I probably meant something like sunny or nice or not rainy
in that little bit that was kind of pulled out of there because you know context, right?
And you know, roughly what to expect. If I walk into a room and I say, hi, how are you doing?
Um, you're not going to have any trouble understanding what I mean, right? That's
pretty common. So let's take you out of the comfort zone and make you listen to a language
that isn't English. This is free.
Chances are, and this is feeling very strange to you. Um, this is feeling like English. Like,
oh wow, this sounds a lot like English, but it isn't quite English. But it realized that
it's now hard for you to see word boundaries. It's hard for you to figure out what's going on.
It's hard for you to understand why I chose this video clip, even though it's actually quite easy.
There aren't that many examples of Frisian on YouTube, let's be real here. But anyways,
Frisian is a cool language. It's very English-y, but it isn't English. And in fact,
it's our closest, it's our language's closest living relative. Um, and certainly phonologically
speaking. And nobody knows any speakers of Frisian except one. Uh, and that is Tony Beetz.
If you watch the show Gold Rush, he is a Frisian speaker. Um, and I only watch the show for Frisian
phonology. I, no, no, no, no other reason, not in any way addictive reality TV trash. No, no,
no, no. Come on guys. So that's one of the things is we use our knowledge of the language to cheat
a great deal as we're doing speech perception. Next thing that's interesting is the gradients
of perception. So we're familiar with categories in a language and that affects our perception
very, very strongly. So let's listen to a pair of words. First we'll hear date,
date, date. Then we'll hear debt, debt, debt. So one more time, date, date,
debt, debt. Great. So now you know the options. Let's listen to some mystery words.
And I want you to ask yourself, is this date or debt? Date.
Date. How about this one? Date. How about this one? Date. Getting a little harder to decide
there. Let's do an experiment. I'm going to play for you a continuum basically, where you'll hear
one word turn into the other. And if language were, you know, think about vowels. We're constantly
moving our tongues and vowels can be an infinite little bit of gradation, right? I mean, you can
move your tongue just a little tiny bit to change vowels. So then it should feel very smooth. It
should smoothly shift from date to debt. So maybe, or let's listen. Let's see. Date, date, date,
date, date, date, debt, debt, debt, debt, debt. So I'll ask you, did it feel smooth or was it
date, date, date, date, and then suddenly, oh God, he's saying debt, debt, debt, debt, debt.
Chances are for many of you, there might've been a little moment of confusion, but it probably
just felt like there was a switch at a certain point. Date, date, date, date, date, date, date,
debt, debt, debt, debt. Neat, right? And try this on your friends. Again, this is in the slides,
you can use it. Anyways. So by looking at this, we can get the idea that our perception is very
strong. We understand that even though vowel quality may differ kind of infinitely, right?
Even though vowels may be able to change very, very little, we will still make strong boundaries.
We make strong decisions. We draw lines in the sand about this is date, this is debt,
and that's important. And these aren't the same decisions as the ones your neighbors make
necessarily, which is cool too. It's great in a big lecture hall, everybody sees the differences.
Okay. There you go. Next trick. Okay. So I'm going to give you a word and this is either the word
bad or banned, but I have removed the final consonant. It's either going to be a bad or a
ban, but I, either way, I have put noise over that last part. So you're either going to hear
bad or ban, but really you're going to hear back because the last part has been removed.
So the only thing that makes these two sounds different should be the last consonant, right?
So if I've removed that, you probably can't tell the difference or can you?
One more time.
Many of you probably had a strong intuition about which one you heard. Let's try this one,
bomb or Bob. Again, you might've had an intuition,
even though it doesn't make sense that you would have. Let's try this one.
How does this work? How can you have these intuitions
even when that consonant is missing? And I'm not lying to you. It really is missing.
What happens here, you might be wondering, am I a wizard? Well, yes, because you speak language,
but no, because we pay attention to tiny details here. In a word like bend, for instance,
there are actually multiple elements of that nasal. That nasal doesn't just stop
at the beginning of the end. There's more to it than the IPA shows us. We have what's called
coarticulation, which is where you start preparing the next sound before that sound even begins,
which is really cool. So in the word bend, we'll start nasal airflow before that nasal N,
but during that vowel. So actually what we see here is that this vowel is nasalized.
The nasality from that N moves back a little bit into that vowel. And suddenly we hear something
a little bit different and we can use this coarticulation to hear the upcoming nasal,
even when the nasal itself is missing. That's magic, right? That's really cool.
Actually, how we do this, how we hear nasality was the topic of my doctoral dissertation.
This is what I'm interested in. Yes, that's a clickable link to a PDF. No, no one's going to
click it, but still that's okay. Speaking of recovering information, let's try this one.
Okay. Let's listen to a couple of sounds here real quick. Sound number one.
What's that? Okay. Sound number two.
And sound number three.
Okay. Question for you is, are those human? Are those speech? No. Chances are one of them
sounded like somebody getting into an inner tube. Another one sounded like a songbird
of some variety, maybe a whale. Now let's play all three of those sounds at once.
The exact same three sounds just overlaid on top of each other.
How about now?
One more time.
Do you hear words? Can you hear words in that? Let's try playing this.
Thanks for attending my presentation.
And now.
Your brain is magic. It was able to turn those three sounds, none of which were human,
into, when you overlay them, human speech. Chances are many of you heard some human
speechy thing, even though there was so little data there. This is called sine wave speech,
and it's really, really awesome. What we do is we break down parts of the spectrum
into just three different waves, and so we make the speech signal very, very sparse. We give you
very little information, but the brain is still amazing enough that it's able to put those things
together, and that's absolutely stellar. Okay, so the next thing we're going to take a look at
is multimodal perception. Now for this part, I really need you to be focused on the screen.
Look at the screen here. So what I want you to do is look at this guy, and now tell me what it is
that this guy is saying. One more time. Okay, so get in your mind what the person was saying.
Now let's look at it again, but let's look at it with your eyes closed. Nothing interesting
will happen on the screen. Just focus on what's being said here. Again, eyes closed. Listen again.
I bet you heard two different things there. I bet the first time when you looked at this,
the clip with your eyes open, you heard one thing, and now with your eyes closed,
you hear a different thing. Now here's the amazing thing. They're the same video. So what I want you
to do this time is to start off looking at the guy, and then close your eyes partway through,
and you're going to hear your perception change. Chances are, when your eyes are closed,
you're hearing ba, and when your eyes are open, you're hearing either da or ga,
and that's because this video is tricky. You're hearing a person saying ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba,
and you're seeing a video of somebody saying ga, ga, ga, ga, ga, ga. These are two different things.
When our brain, that is, sees, oh god, he's making a g, but I'm hearing a b,
it kind of crashes. It's like, this is problematic. I can't do anything with this. I'll split the
difference. It's probably a d, and then we take it from there, but as a result, what this is
telling us is actually something super interesting. One could picture a world in which speech
perception, which is inherently kind of an auditory thing, right, only has to do with,
well, hearing, but that's not what we're seeing here. Instead, what we see is that hearing and
vision both play a role. You are both hearing people's speech with your ears and with your
eyes, and that's fascinating. That's really cool, and so the McGurk effect tells us fascinating
things about language, namely that we're using more than one modality for speech perception,
and even people, for instance, who are not hard of hearing are doing this too. It's really cool.
Next thing is tone. Tone languages are amazing. Tone is changes in pitch during the word change.
Wow. Prosody is where I properly intonate that sentence. I just didn't do that right,
so changes in pitch during the word change the meaning of the word. There we go. That's language.
So you can get two different kinds of tone. You can get level tone, high versus low, and sometimes
you'll get mid or rising and falling. Here's an example from the language Zarma. So here's two
words. Yesterday be, won't be. Yesterday be, won't be. So there are two different sounds be.
There's be and be. Be, be. The only difference there is the pitch of the voice and probably my
eyebrows because I'm very bad at doing tone without using my eyebrows, and so if I can play
you these things and you can tell me which one is which, right? So if I give you yesterday is high
and wound is low, which one is which? Yesterday be, won't be. Yesterday be. I just said that out
loud. Whoops. Anyways, so we can tell which one has the high tone based on listening to the pitch
of the voice, right? And then other languages have contour tones where the pitch pattern is able to
change the meaning. So Mandarin Chinese has this, and you can watch this link for a whole video
talking about this, but in Mandarin actually the tone that you produce the word ma with will have
massive effects on what word you're hearing. It could be mother, bother, horse, scold, or other
kinds of things. So this is really, really cool and is something that I really appreciate. So tone
is where the pitch of your voice changes the meaning of words. It's super common around the
world and it's really fascinating. Then finally, the coolest trick of all. I'm going to make you
listen to this. Please call Stella. Ask her to bring these things with her from the store.
Six spoons of fresh snow peas, five thick slabs of blue cheese, and maybe a snack for her brother
Bob. We also need a small plastic snake and a big toy frog for the kids. She can scoop these things
into three red bags and we will go meet her Wednesday at the train station. Okay, so you just
did the single hardest thing that's really possible in speech perception. This right there that you
are listening to is a woman you've never met, right? Presumably you've never met her. You're
probably never going to meet this person. She was, at the time of recording, 28 years old from
Monrovia, Liberia, which is a country in Africa. She is also a speaker of Liberian Pidgin English,
which is probably not a language you've ever heard before. Maybe it is, but probably not.
She's from a place you've probably never been. She's also a speaker of a language you don't speak.
You've never seen her face, by the way. You have no idea what she looks like, what she's
shaped like as a human. You've never had a conversation with her. The thing is you understood
her. Maybe it took you a second, maybe it didn't, but you understood every word that that woman said.
Seriously, you've probably never heard anybody with a Liberian Pidgin English accent before. You've
probably never heard anybody from Liberia. You had no way of seeing her to judge how large or small
her vocal tract was. Because remember, vowels are about resonance, and resonances change depending
on how big or small your vocal tract is. You had no gestures to rely on. You had no facial movements.
You couldn't watch her on screen talking, and so you had no way to fill in the blanks there,
and you had no context to know what words she would or wouldn't say. This is exactly a worst
case scenario for speech perception. There is very, very little information that you had here,
aside from exactly what is in the speech. But you didn't give a damn. You probably had no problem
with this. And in fact, all of us, when we listen to something like this, don't seem to care that
every single person that we will ever meet sounds different. Just because of the different shaped
vocal tracts, because of their different dialect, socioelect, idiolect, because of their different
language backgrounds, every person we meet will sound different, socially, etc., anatomically
different. The vowel that I have in the word bet might be acoustically identical to the vowel you
have in the word bit. The resonances might be the same for my eh and your ih. That's a very
real possibility. And in fact, even as I'm talking, if I say the word cat, cat, cat, cat, cat, cat, cat,
cat, all of those words were the same thing. But you understood that, even though acoustically
all of them were very different. And so no two productions of even the same word by the same
person are identical. And in fact, you are your own little acoustical snowflake, not just in terms
of your dialect and idiolect, but you are your own acoustical snowflake too. And the thing is,
no one gives a damn. No one cares. No one even thinks about this. We just talk and it works. And
this is magic. This is the most magical thing you ever do. This question, how we adjust to different
speakers, was the topic of my MA thesis. Not making that available, it was a dumpster fire.
This is a topic for my entire Ling 214 speech perception course. Making speech is hard.
This is true, but understanding speech is even harder than that. Being able to adjust when two
people sound exactly the same and we don't even notice that they sound exactly the same, saying
different words, but we just understand. Oh my God. But the fact is, we're doing it right now.
I'm talking. It's not bothering me. I can do this all day, as you're noticing. And you're
listening and you can keep doing this and you'll get up and you'll talk to somebody and you won't
even think about it because you'll be thinking about, wow, I'd sure like a sandwich. Do we have
materials for a sandwich or whatever it is that you're thinking about right now. You are going to,
we don't care. This is amazing. Speech is impossible. It really is. We shouldn't be
able to do this part with the flap and the meat around. We shouldn't be able to do this
part where we understand it, but we do it anyways. And that's because we are really,
really awesome. Our ability to produce speech is incredible. We flap bits of meat around inside of
our heads in precise, intricate patterns and series without thinking, trying or running out
of air, which by the way, you don't do. Right? When was the last time you ran out of air mid
sentence? Probably a long time ago. And if you're anything like me, you were probably going upstairs
or something like that. We never do this. And why? And we can do it while we're walking. We can do
it while I'm frantically gesturing around in my office. We can do it while we're running,
biking or eating. We can do this in an amazing diversity of circumstances and we still get the
message across. So our ability to perceive speech is absolutely incredible too, because we pull
these signals out of the air. And this is going into a microphone through all kinds of fancy
signal processing algorithms into probably a set of headphones on your ears that are bouncing and
that are sending that down into your ear canal. And now you're parsing them according to rules in
your mind that no one really knows quite how those work. You're taking advantage of little
tiny details. We're covering huge amounts of lost information and wading through an amount
of variability that is completely mind boggling without noticing that you're doing anything
special. This is really cool. And this is why I say over and over again, that speech is the
most complicated thing that you will ever do as a human. And yet you don't think twice about it.
Speech is magic. Seriously, speech is amazing. It's the coolest thing ever. And the fact that
we're not telling kids about this in elementary school of like, oh my God, you can talk. How are
you able to do that? Oh my God, you can sign. Signed languages are amazing too. Oh my God,
how does any of this work? That is amazing. That is magic. And you are all wizards.
So if you want more information about speech, take Ling 110 and then Ling 112. And then for
perception, take 113. And you can get a whole bunch more information. Just had to have a little
plug in there. But nonetheless, thank you. And go forth and talk and realize that, oh my God,
that's basically magic. And have yourself a wonderful rest of your day.
