Okay, hi everybody. First off, I have two quick reminders for you. The first one is
that we have a study guide for this course that's online. Your final exam will be open
book, open note, of course, but it's going to be useful for you to have as much as you'd
like, as much information as you can, that is, kind of put up into your head, so to speak.
And this study guide tells you all of the things you're going to need to know this quarter.
Not just for phonetics and phonology, but throughout the rest of the quarter. It's just
a useful resource, and so as you're going through and as you're kind of figuring out,
okay, did I learn everything I need to from this section of the course? The study guide
is a great place to find out. So check that out.
The other thing is the phonetics phonology quick reference, which not only has some good
IPA words to memorize, some IPA tips, but also has information about phonological rule
notation that we'll talk about later on in today's lecture. But both of those things
are online, and both of those things are really good resources for you to use as you're guiding
your learning in this class.
So today we're going to start talking about phonology, the sound patterns of language.
And our plan is to first define phonology. Seems like a good thing to do, right? To talk
about phonemic analysis, that is, how we decide whether something is a phoneme or an allophone.
We'll talk about that, what that means in a bit here. We'll talk about how to tell whether
I'm actually Batman, and then we will talk about writing phonological rules and what
that actually looks like.
So first off, a quick note on notation. We are going to start differentiating writing
words in the IPA in slashes and in brackets. You've probably seen IPA in slashes already
in this course. What the difference is, is a little bit, well, it's very fiddly, right?
When you have things in slashes, this means at an abstract level. These are things that
are going on inside of your head. This top here means top at a very abstract level. As
opposed to this guy here, which means that same sequence of sounds, but coming out of
my mouth. So in this case, that would mean top. And so we would have two different sort
of representations here. What's going on in the speaker's mind goes in slashes. What's
going on in the speaker's mouth goes in brackets. So that's the big difference there. This will
make more sense as we spend more time on this, but yeah, that's a note on notation.
So now at this point in time, we've done phonetics, right? We know roughly what speech looks like.
We know what this world looks like. We know what sounds we're using in English. We know
how to describe those sounds in terms of things like voiced, voiceless, in terms of other
elements of what they're called natural classes. So all of the alveolar sounds form a class,
nasal sounds. We know how to talk about stops versus fricatives, etc. And we know symbols
that we can use to talk about sounds rather than letters, which is really, really important.
But at this point in time, we've got all these sounds. We should just be able to put them
together, right? That would make sense. So let's look at all of these sounds here. We've
got at the top here, I, K, P, S, D. Those are all sounds present in English, right?
We have words with each of those. So I has in like bit. Kick has that sound. Pit. Skip
has actually a bunch of those. And then D as in dog, right? Those are all sounds we
have in English. So we should be able to put them together. And in fact, we can. See? Skip.
Cool. Those sounds work. That's an English word. Kid. Well, that worked. Great. English
word. Pick. Yeah. English word. Sure. Sip. Yep. Absolutely. Dip. Yeah. These are all
English words. So if we have all these English sounds and we put them together, it works.
Kiss and so on. But then there comes a problem though, because what about I? Can I be an
English word? Probably not. According to most English speakers, I is a poorly formed English
word. If I gave you a brand new object and I said, this is an I, you'd be like a what?
You didn't finish the word. So I doesn't work. How about a K? Could that be an English word?
Oh, I made a new invention. It's called a K. People are going to be like new. No, it isn't.
P. This is weird, right? Because P, for instance, is a word. Like I had a plate of peas. P can be
a word, but P, that doesn't work for some reason. How about P-D? P-D? P-D doesn't fly for most
English speakers. How about K-S-P? No, that's not going to be an English word. None of these
things can be English words. And so this is unusual, right? We've got all those sounds.
Shouldn't they go together? Well, let's think about this. Plural marker. The S sound is a
plural marker, right? So if we've got skip, we should have skips. Yeah. Okay, great. That works.
And if we have pick, as in a dental pick, then we have picks, right? Easy. But then what about
kids? Kids. Kids. Kids doesn't work, right? We need something better than kids.
How about, in fact, that should be kids. Or kiss. We have the word kiss. Why wouldn't this be kiss?
Kiss. I mean, partly because English doesn't do two consonants next to each other. That doesn't
fly. But the other reason is that we have a separate thing going on. In fact, in English,
this becomes kisses. But why? Again, we have all these sounds. What's the point there?
So adding the plural marker is more than just adding an S in English. In fact, there are several
different versions of the plural marker in English. We call these different allomorphs,
different forms of this plural, what's called morpheme, little chunk of meaning. So there are
three different allomorphs of this morpheme, of the S. And so you might be thinking to yourself,
okay, well, that's weird, right? So if you've got skips as the plural of skip, kids with a Z
is the plural of kid, and kisses is the plural of kiss, then maybe we just memorize this. Maybe
as we were growing up, we heard people say, oh, okay, that's a skip. So then we have skips. Cool.
Easy. Memorized. No problems. Then we ask ourselves, what would S be for a brand new word?
And in fact, this brings us to a really cool experiment that's gone on in the linguistic
world. This is the WUG test. So this was developed originally by a very well-known linguist named
Jean Berko Gleason. And what she did is she presented kids with a WUG. Actually, she presented
a bunch of people with a WUG, kids included. But this is a WUG right here. Now there are two of
them. There are two. So ask yourself, which of the following is true? If there is one WUG,
there are two. A, wugs, B, wugs, C, wuggis, or D, wuggiz. So wugs, wugs, wuggis, wuggiz.
Most English speakers, including young kids, are going to reply, well, the answer is wugs.
That's weird. What if it was a wuck? What if there was a different creature called a wuck,
and there were two of them? So is it A, wucks, B, wucks, wucks, C, wuggis, and D, wuggiz?
Yeah, most people are going to have wucks, A. What if it was a wush? That's also not an English
word. You've never heard it before. So wushes, wushes, wushes, wushes. Yeah, most people are
going to have wushes. There are two wushes there. And by the way, this leads to all kinds
of linguistic memes. In fact, you can see right here, this is the UC San Diego Linguistics
Department logo, which is a WUG with the sun god on it. Now you understand what that little dude
is. But anyways, yeah, linguist dubstep would be wug, wug, wug, wug, wug, wug, wug, wug, wug.
Yeah. Anyways, so how do we know this? How do we have these instincts that the plural of wugs
should be wugs, the plural of wuck should be wucks, and the plural of wush should be wushes?
How do we have all this? And why are there three different versions of the plural marker in English
anyways? Why do we do that? Well, the answer to this is phonology. Phonology is our next subfield,
and it's what we're going to cover here. And phonology is the study of how sounds pattern
in language and in languages, generally speaking. So we might ask ourselves, what do phonologists
study? Why are phonologists doing all of this? And so there are a bunch of questions that
phonologists might study. Within a language, you might ask yourself, for instance, what sounds
are able to differentiate words? So what I mean by that is the word, let's see here, jug, is
fundamentally different in meaning than the word tug or the word mug. All of those things are
different words. So clearly those sounds can differentiate words, but other ones might not,
right? And what do speakers hear, and this is a very related question, as being the same sound?
If I give you, for instance, tug and tug, tug, tug, tug, tug, you don't really, you might hear
a slight difference in sound, but you don't hear them as being different words. Even though one of
those was a dental T, the other of them was an alveolar T. We might ask ourselves, how do speakers
tend to group sounds together in the language? What is it that speakers are doing to combine
sounds? So why do we always end up doing similar things to all of the nasals? Why do alveolar sounds
tend to act similarly? This is because they share a natural class. How do sounds change when we
combine them together? These are phonological alternations, and we'll talk about those a great
deal more. What sound combinations are legal in the language? For instance, why is skip okay, but
xid wouldn't be? What's up with that? We might ask ourselves what a syllable is, how it's formed,
what kind of syllable does a language prefer? We might ask ourselves questions about stress,
or pitch, or emphasis. Stress, of course, being, you know, in a word, what parts of the word
actually have stress? So, for instance, why is it emphasis rather than emphasis, or emphasis?
These are all other questions within phonology. So phonology is a very, very broad field, and all of
them together, we want to ask ourselves, how can we generate a theory of language that can explain
all of these various things? And this brings us into a theoretical discipline. Phonetics has
theory, absolutely 100 percent, and I don't mean to sell it short, but relative to a lot of areas
of linguistics, it's much less theoretical. Phonology is a very theoretical part of linguistics.
We've been focused on concrete data, but now we're going to start talking more about linguistic
theory, which is a question of how humans do language. What's going on in our heads that
gives us the ability to say wucks versus wugs versus washes? Why is this a thing? How can we
most gracefully describe the data that we see in the world? How do we most gracefully describe the
things that speakers are actually doing? How do we account for most of the data out there in the
world? Because a theory that works really well for half of the data isn't generally a great theory,
right? We want something to explain everything, or at least almost everything, pretty well.
And so there are a lot of theoretical questions we might ask generally in linguistic, right?
So how do we model the patterns we see? How are we able to figure out why we do this weird thing
with the English plural? Are we using rules, for instance, in phonology that transform some sound
that is underlying, some early version of the sound, maybe an S, into different forms? Or are
we choosing a form that does the fewest things we don't like? This is actually a really interesting
question and a major divide in phonology. Or maybe another approach would be to say,
actually, we're not doing any of that. Maybe we're just remembering the words that we've heard,
and then we're just saying, okay, well, hold on just a second here. I've got wug here. This is a
mug. The plural of this is mugs, because I heard, you know, people say that in the world. So then
if the plural of this is mugs, then the plural of that thing there is wugs. So yeah, that makes
sense, right? That's another approach you can take. And so all of these are possible approaches.
And then the big question is, how do these handle real data from real languages?
Actually use that mug, you know. But how do these handle actual language data? Do they
predict the things that really happen? And do they predict crazy things that never happen?
Because a great theory is going to generate all the possible forms that we see. It's going to
tell us everything that is observed, and it's not going to give us crazy things that we don't see,
right? This is a perfect generative model will do that. And then another question is, how do they
account for the exceptions? Are there weird data that these theories can't account for?
Really cool questions. And then finally, does this theory actually describe something
going on inside our mind? Or is this theory something that we're just using for description?
Is this just something that's kind of a useful shorthand, even if it doesn't have any cognitive
reality? Is it just a tool for describing language, or is it a mental construct there?
We're just going to scrape the surface of theoretical questions here in Ling 101.
As you go forward, as you take 110, phonetics, 111, phonology, 120, morphology, syntax. Oh,
boy, are you going to have the... But you'll get deeper into theory here. But for the moment,
we're just scraping that surface. But know that these questions are there, and they're really,
really cool. Big, big fan of this. So one of the things to kind of help you work with a little bit
is that phonology is not the same thing as phonetics. These are two different fields.
Phoneticians are, like myself, are more concerned with the physical processes of speech. For
instance, with what the mouth and jaw is actually doing as I'm trying to talk. That's useful. I'm
interested in what's actually going on in hearing. I'm interested in how you're actually trying to
pick apart the things that you're hearing into, well, speech perception, right? So all of these
things, articulation, perception, and the cognition underlying all of it, that's phonetics.
Phonology is different. It's more concerned with the patterns of sound structure in different
languages. So for instance, putting aside what's going on in the head at all, why is it the case
that nasal sounds like M or N or NG tend to move around a little bit more often than, for instance,
oral stops like T or D or M? I'm sorry, M is a nasal stop. Or B is what I meant to say there.
So those kinds of facts are something that phonologists are more interested in.
So things like markedness, what's okay in the language, phonotactics,
what combinations are going to be legal in producing new words, the rules that are used
there, and general cross-linguistic patterns. All of these things are very, very different.
And certainly you can use phonetic data to answer phonological questions. And phonology oftentimes
gives us interesting information about phonetics, but they are not the same thing. You can definitely
learn from both of those things. And like I said, more and more, a lot of people are applying
laboratory methods for phonology, well, laboratory methods from phonetics for phonology, but they're
not the same thing. We love each other very, very much, phonetics and phonology, but we're different.
They are deeply different fields. And when I talk with my colleagues, even in the department,
we have a phonco group, which is the phonetics and phonology people, generally speaking.
Um, we all talk, we all have fun. We all understand each other for the most part,
but we are fundamentally different beasts and asking different questions about the world.
So, um, okay, cool. There's your background. Now let's go into action. You've just jumped
out of a plane. You are coming down into a, an area unknown, um, that you, you know,
nothing about the language that you're getting into there. Um, but you've decided wherever I
land, I'm going to describe the language they speak there. Um, and so your goal is to collect
data, to write a grammar and write a dictionary. Great. Seems reasonable, right? A grammar would
be a listing of all the various rules that you find in that language that control things like
sentence structure and such in a dictionary just lists all the words. So you might ask yourself,
what are the morphemes in this language? What are the units of meaning? What are the little
tiny chunks of meaning that you find? So for instance, the English plural S that's a morpheme
cat morpheme, et cetera. What are the words in this language? What are the chunks of bigger
meaning that you might want to be using? How are the, how should you write this language down?
Like what writing system should you come up with? If there is not already there,
you'll need to make decisions. But one of the big questions you're going to face as you make all of
these decisions is what of these sounds actually matter to the people who are speaking, right?
Which of these sounds carry a contrast, which of these sounds are able to define words to make
them different from other words out there? And what sounds can you not change without changing
the meaning of a word? This is a really big one. And so this gets at this fundamental question in
phonology of phonemic analysis. You determine what sound changes affect the meaning of words
in a language, which sounds are important enough that changing them changes the word.
We call these phonemic sounds as opposed to sound changes that are predictable,
where we understand when this change happens and why it happens in many cases,
but it doesn't actually change the meaning. So for instance, wugs versus wucks, we know that
both of those things are a plural marker, right? It doesn't change the meaning of the plural.
We just know that they're different and we have to figure out why we can in fact predict that.
And these are what are called allophonic sounds. So phonemic sounds change meaning.
Allophonic sounds are predictable. They don't change meaning. And then there are
classes of sound variation that are completely unpredictable and they're meaningless. We don't
know why they happen and it doesn't matter to speakers whether they happen or not. It just
is a thing. And this is called free variation. It's not as common. And don't worry about that
as you're doing homework. I'm not going to give you something that's actually free variation
and make you suffer in that way. So we're going to look at this process. We're going to look at
this idea of phonemic analysis, trying to figure out what's a phoneme, what's phonemic, what's
allophonic, and what's free variation using three very different views. And we're actually
going to loop back to the same material three times, trying three different approaches. The
reason for this is that this is a difficult concept for many people. You'll get it. I believe in you.
But at the same time, I want to make sure that you've got that before you're moving forward.
And if at the end of today's lecture, you're feeling like, oh God, I'm still lost, then,
well, A, come to the help session, but also just come to class. Come to office hours. We are happy
to help walk you through this. You won't be the first person this has tripped up, but hopefully
you're going to do great. So first, we'll look at this in terms of data, in terms of let's look
at chunks of language and see what we've got there. Second, we'll look at it in terms of
perception. And then finally, we'll look at it in terms of distribution, in terms of where the
sounds occur. So like I said, this is an important concept. It's a threshold concept. And that's why
I'm spending this much time. And if you're struggling, please come to office hours.
So number one, let's just check some data, right? You've landed out of your plane there,
and there were sounds everywhere. People are using this huge set of sounds, and you don't
know what differences matter. What changes in sound are random and don't affect meaning?
That's free variation. What changes in sounds are meaningful and change the meaning of a world,
of the word, that is, that's phonemes. And what can be predicted and doesn't change the meaning?
Those are allophones. And this then makes you wonder, okay, so let's say I'm writing a dictionary.
If I hear a sound that changes all the time and it doesn't matter, I don't really need to write
it down in a specific way in the dictionary, right? That would be deceptive. But if a sound
change is very meaningful, I want to make sure that it's written down that way in my dictionary,
in my grammar, et cetera. So let's look at these sample data from a language here.
And actually, let's just go ahead and use English as an example.
So what this little diacritic here, this little set of vampire fangs here,
little vampire fangs mean teeth, right? Dental. This is a dental T and this is an alveolar T
over here. So if I say the word team, which is this guy, and if I say the word team, team, team,
did I say two different words in English? Probably not. If I say T's, T's, I've just
said the same word twice. Tie, tie, same thing. Top, top, you don't care. So going back and forth
between an alveolar stop and a dental stop in English just doesn't matter. This is free variation.
It doesn't change the meaning. And we can't really predict when it's going to happen or not.
Usually it's because of some external factor. Like for instance, you grew up speaking Spanish
or Russian, or any other language around the world that has dental T's, right? It doesn't
matter though. And so we can switch between these. Nobody really cares. And there's not a good way
to predict it. It's just maddening chaos. So this is free variation. If we look at the data and it
varies and no one cares and we can't predict why, then free variation, no problem there.
Let's take a look at these words in English here. Okay. So this is the word key. This is the word
pea. Are these two different words? Yeah. Key like your car key and pea like I ate a pea with
my dinner. And then, okay, how about this one? This is caught and this is pot. Caught, pot.
Those are two different words again, right? So one of them is a little roll up thing that you
bring into your hotel room. And this thing is something that you cook with, right? Those are
two very different things. Cast and past cast past ones, the past, by the way, I gestured
backwards. That's not universal around languages and cultures of the world. And the other is a
cast. Like if you break an arm, so cast and past different words, cop and pop again, two very
different words, right? Cool and pool. Very different. So then the difference between K
and P in English is actually very important, right? If I were to switch between these, then you
wouldn't know whether I'm talking about a cast or the past, right? Those are two different words.
And so in this case, the meaning changes. Listening to these, we know that changing these
two words, changing between a K and a P, I'm sorry, those two letters actually changes the
meaning of the word. And therefore that's, that's important. Um, so we see also what's called a
minimal pair here. The only thing that is changed between T and P is the letter is, I'm sorry,
not the letter, the sound. It's not the letter. Don't use letter. Sorry, that was violent, but I,
I really, that bothers me when students do it, so I shouldn't do it either. I won't hit you.
Anyways, I'll keep it in the video. Why not? So anyways, um, minimal pairs are when you get
two things that differ by a single sound, by a different segment, not necessarily by a letter,
because the writing system is lying to you. But anyways, when you have a key and P, those things
are a minimal pair. They are very slightly different. The segment is the only thing that
has changed. So this is a minimal pair. That's a really good sign that you have what's called
a contrastive distribution. It's called that because these two sounds are contrasting each
other. There is a contrast between using K and using P in this language. It matters to the
speakers. So these two things are different phonemes in English. K and P are different
phonemes. So, okay, now let's look at this set of data here. We've got safe over here,
and we've got save over here. Are those different words or are they the same word?
Those are different, right? One you put valuables in, the other is an action that you do with a
document, right? Ape and Abe, one is a name and the other is a type of animal, right? Mate and
made. But what we see here is a difference because the vowel here, A, is longer in these
latter columns here. So we've got mate and made, H and age, ache, egg. In some places, egg can also
be a thing, but you'll see egg out there. And then mace and maize. So mace, like a medieval
piece of armament, or I guess pepper spray, whatever. You're a D&D nerd. You've got whatever.
And then maize, like the maze where you've got the minotaur that's chasing after you,
probably with a mace. So anyways, what we see here are long vowels in this column
and short vowels over here. The long vowels marked by that colon.
So does that difference change the meaning? Well, this is scary because the meaning has
changed, right? Safe and save. But it's not the only thing that's changed, right? The F
has also changed into a V in this column. Safe, save. So it's not the case that the
vowel is the only thing changing. Ape, abe. And in fact, if I were to make ape, ape, safe, safe,
it's going to be weird, right? But you're still going to understand me. So this is different.
It's not free variation because there seems to be a pattern here. And we'll talk about that
in a second. And it's not phonemic because these aren't a minimal pair. There are other
differences aside from just being short versus long vowels. In fact, there's a pattern here that
tells us when all of these things grow longer. No. Changing from a short A to a long A does not
change the meaning for the speakers. In fact, it's that other segment that changes the meaning.
And in fact, what's going on here is the voicing of the next consonant predicts this. If we look
at this, save, a, b, d, j, g, z, all of those are voiced and s, k, ch, t, p, s, I'm sorry,
those are all voiceless. So we get a long vowel before a voiced sound and a short vowel before
a voiceless one. So this is predictable based on voicing of the next consonant. So therefore,
short and long vowels in English are in a complementary distribution. This is not
complement in the sense of, hey, nice hair. This is complement in the sense of a mathematical
complement. All of things belong to either this class or that class. It is a complementary
distribution in that they form a complement in that way. So these are allophones of the same
phoneme. Rather than being different phonemes because they change the meaning or in free
variation where they change, no one cares and they're unpredictable. These are predictable
and changing between them doesn't change the meaning. These are allophones. So, okay, ask
yourself for a second here. How do you feel about this? Do you feel like you get it? Are you okay?
Not sure? Then just kind of keep that in the back of your head. Hopefully we're going to feel a
little bit better about it each time. And sometimes it's helpful to just to think about your level of
awareness. I'm going to give you a second for me to drink tea and for you to think about any
questions that you might have, but hopefully I'll get back to them later. All right.
So let's think about this in a different way. Let's think about perception instead. So we'll
use Spanish because I know many students in the class will speak Spanish, which is great.
So cabo, this is the Spanish word for cape. And if I say cabo, people will understand me,
generally speaking, but I can actually say two different things. I can say cabo,
cabo, cabo with a B, or I can say cabo, cabo, cabo. That little beta looking guy is a bilabial
approximate. Cabo. I'm not completely bringing my lips together there. So this bilabial approximate
cabo or cabo both sound to a Spanish speaker, like the word cabo, right? And so these two things
are equivalent for Spanish speakers. They don't change the word. There's not a contrast there.
So put differently, a Spanish speaker will hear a B in that word, whether I say either an actual
voiced bilabial stop or a bilabial approximate, both of those things will work.
Let's use an English example. English actually has two L sounds. This is something we haven't
talked about so far because it's a little bit tricky. It's a deeper detail, but we have what's
called the light L, as in the word lip, lip, lip, lip. Try and make these sounds, lip. And then we've
got a dark L or a velarized L, which is written with a little squiggly in the middle of it,
and that's as in the sound pill, pill, pill. So you go back and forth, lip, lip, pill, pill.
In one case, the back of your tongue is going to be bunched up. In the velarized case,
you're going to have a velar constriction, hence velarized, as opposed to the light L,
where you're just going to have something going on in the front of your mouth.
So the light L and the dark L are fundamentally different, right? But the thing is,
we know when they happen, right? In English, the dark L happens at the end of a syllable.
So an English speaker will hear the word pill. I can give you the word pill, and you will
understand me if I say either pill, the normal expected pronunciation. If I say pill, you're
going to be fine, like I took a pill yesterday. But you'll also get it if I say pill, pill, pill,
pill, pill. It's a little weird, right, pill? Do you have a pill for that? Maybe a little funky,
but by and large, you're not going to hear that strong of a difference. And same thing on the
other side, by the way. I could say lip. I could say lip, lip, lip, lip, lip, and that's fine. Or
I could say lip with the light L. So English speakers will hear an L, whether I say either
the light L or the dark L, L or L, both are L to English speakers. It doesn't matter which one you
use, but we can predict which one is which based on the position in the word. So what's important,
and by the way, pay attention here to the slashes versus the brackets. These are different
allophones. This is a phoneme. This exists in the head. These come out of your mouth.
So put differently, speakers of a language will hear a phoneme whenever somebody says any of the
allophones of that phoneme. Anytime that you see any of the allophones of a phoneme, you will go
ahead and link it to that phoneme, which is going on in your mind. So phonemes are groups of sounds
which can trade places predictably. A phoneme is sort of, you can talk about the high level thing,
the L phoneme in slashes, or you can talk about it as being the phoneme is a group of several
allophones. In this case of L, it's a light L and a dark L, or in Spanish, it is the bilabial stop
and the bilabial approximate. Both of those things form a group of sounds and both of them trade
places. That trading is pretty opaque to speakers. You might be able to tell, you know,
lip, it's a little weird, right? But I guess, whatever. It's not, you know, super apparent,
but it's definitely there. So the L phoneme in English has two allophones, L and L, lip and pill,
and the T phoneme has a bunch more allophones. T has all kinds of allophones. You've got an
unaspirated version as in star. You've got the aspirated version with the little H as in tar.
You've got a glottal stop here as in button, button, button. You have an unreleased version
as in cat. It's not cat, cat. You have a tap as in later and a nasal tap as in winter, winter.
So yeah, cool, right? And every sound that is produced is an allophone of some phoneme,
right? This is the tricky part. All of these sounds, there's a phoneme and then we produce
one of the allophones in a given context, right? And one thing to note is that not every phoneme
has multiple allophones. For instance, V in English really doesn't change that much, right?
There's not all that much that happens to V. It doesn't get pushed around. It doesn't change either.
So you have the phoneme V and then below it, the allophone V and it's kind of boring, right?
Don't spend much time on it in phonology. But nonetheless, so every sound that's produced is
an allophone of some phoneme or another and not every phoneme has allophones. So, okay,
we've now thought about this in a different way, thinking about it in terms of perceptual
equivalence. Speakers hear the phoneme when you produce any of the allophones. Feeling any better
about this now? Feel free to think about some questions while I drink some tea.
We will spend a lot more time with this material. Don't worry. Okay, now let's look at it in a third
way. Distribution is really important here. Allophones are predictable. This is what
distinguishes them from free variation, which is just chaos, right? But allophones are predictable.
They will always show up in very specific environments and they do not affect the
meaning of the word. So for instance, the ma, ma, ma. Now watch this. Ma, ma, ma is the basic one.
Both of my lips are closed. Ma, ma, ma. As opposed to a labiodental M, which is ma, ma, ma. Where I
am still putting air out through my nose. But there's a labiodental closure right here. See?
So a labiodental M will show up in English only when there's an M before an F. So you get same
ma, ma, ma. But symphony, symphony. Try saying symphony right now on your own. Go! Symphony.
You can say symphony, symphony, symphony, but it's kind of weird, right? You're just going to say
symphony. You'll make that labiodental M. Everything will be okay. So M shows up only
when there's an M before an F. Similarly, the dental N shows up in English only when there
is an N before an interdental sound. So for instance, pine, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh. Tongue
is not between the teeth. Pine, nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh. But then pine thug, pine thug. Don't, don't
ask. Pine thug. So pine, nuh, nuh, pine thug. So there we see that that N has moved and we can
predict why, because it's before an interdental sound, right? And similarly, the dark L only
shows up in Muse at the end of a syllable. Interestingly, other dialects of English around
the world have very different rules for light and dark L, but that's kind of fun and separate.
So, okay. Allophones show up according to rules. You will be able to write a rule as to when an
allophone shows up. If a sound is a variant of another sound that only shows up according to a
rule, then chances are it's an allophone of another phoneme. If you can predict when a sound occurs,
then it's an allophone of another phoneme. As opposed to a phoneme, which is unpredictable,
there is no pattern that dictates when they show up. They will occur in the same environment.
So for instance, let's say pit and mitt. Pit and mitt, like the pit of a cherry and a catcher's
mitt from baseball. So a mitt and a pit are fundamentally different words. You can't predict
when you're going to see an M versus a P in English. It depends. Are you talking about a
mitt or are you talking about the pit of a cherry, right? It doesn't matter. There's no way to predict
this based on sound. And this is, by the way, another one of those minimal pairs. Mitt and
pit differ only by virtue of that first letter there. Ah, first sound. See, what I'm doing here
is I'm making that mistake repeatedly. That way you won't make that mistake yourself. Learning.
Yeah, pedagogical equivalent of stonks. Anyways, moving on. But these four minimal pairs,
where there is just one difference in sound, in segment there. Or sometimes you'll get near
minimal pairs like tether and measure. They're not exactly the same, but the immediate context
is correct. But anyways, so if a sound has its own identity in the language's structure,
that is, if it shows up on its own unpredictably and it's not a variant of something else that
you can predict, then it's a phoneme. But if the sound is just another persona of another sound,
then it's an allophone. So to get a little deeper into this, let's ask a very simple question.
Am I Batman? Many of you may not know me super well, but that's a very valid question you might
ask. How do you find out if I'm secretly Batman? How do you hunt that down on the internet? How do
you figure this out? Well, the easiest way to do this is to actually look at the distributions,
right? If you see Batman and Will in the same context, then they are two very different people.
Let's say you walked into a classroom one day in the future and you see I'm up at the front of the
room and I'm chatting and Batman is up at the front of the room and we're chatting. We're
talking about allophony or something like that, which is great. Then if you can see me and Batman
in the exact same context, then clearly Batman and I are two different people. If you find two people
talking to each other in the same place, that's a good indication that they are in fact different
people. They're independent entities. Two different personas can't be in the same place at the exact
same time. And look, we know this as humans, right? This is intuitive. If you're trying to figure out
whether somebody in your discord is actually an alt nickname for another person, if they're both
talking at the same time, that's decent evidence, right? Not perfect, but if you see two people in
the exact same context at the exact same time, then you know what? They're probably two different
things. So in this case, if Batman and I are both talking at the front of the same classroom,
we are in contrastive distribution. There's one and there's the other, and there's a difference
between those two things. They happen in the same context. So if you have two sounds that show up in
an identical context in a minimal pair, where for instance, again, mit and pit, P and M there,
that's the same context, they must be independent phonemes. They must be two different phonological
people, so to speak. That said, there's another approach. Let's say that were the case that
if you only, if you look around and there's no crime going on, and then you see me,
and then a few minutes later, some crime occurs, and then suddenly Batman is there.
This might start to make you wonder, like, wait a second. Anytime that there's crime, I see Batman,
but anytime that there's no crime, then I see Will. Interesting, right? This is a sign that Will could
be the same thing as Batman. If you never, ever, ever see two things in the same context, and in
fact, when the context changes, suddenly you see one rather than the other, that's a sign that I
could be the same thing as Batman, right? And so, and again, if you see close evidence of a
transformation, if for instance, crime starts occurring in the classroom, you know, somebody
steals somebody's laptop in the back, I suddenly run out of the classroom, and then I come back,
and then, I'm sorry, Batman comes back in and apprehends the criminal, that's a pretty good
piece of evidence that I might be Batman, right? So, we can use this. If we see a transformation,
where one thing becomes another thing when the context changes, that's good evidence. This is
an alternation. This is important, and this would indicate that Will and Batman are in a complementary
distribution. I would never go to the grocery store as Batman, absolutely not, that wouldn't
make sense, but I would never go to the scene of a crime as Will. That would be really ridiculous,
too, because I'd be like, dude, why did you send a linguist? Which, to be fair, they've got a point,
right? So, if one shows up in one context, and the other shows up in another context, this is
complementary distribution. So, if you have two sounds that show up only in different contexts,
or if the sound suddenly changes, then they're probably allophones of the same phoneme.
They're probably two identities of the same underlying person, right? So, put differently,
for those of you who are maybe more familiar with the pop culture legend, this is Bruce Wayne over
here, at least a recent iteration of Bruce Wayne, and this is Batman. These are the same person,
but again, you'd never see Bruce Wayne at a crime scene, and you'd never see Batman in the grocery
store. You'd probably never see Bruce Wayne in the grocery store, too. He's probably rich enough,
he could just do, like, I don't know, hire someone. Anyways, I digress, putting the socioeconomics of
Batman completely aside. These two things, these two entities, are actually the same creature.
They're actually the same underlying human, but they are only going to show up in different areas,
and we compare that to, for instance, Batman and Superman, who recently showed up in a movie which
was a movie, but nonetheless, we can see that they are both together at the same crime scene,
right? They're both showing up in the same context, therefore, these are two different
entities. They are contrasted. It's not the case that Batman is secretly Superman, and vice versa.
So, to sum up everything, Superman is an allophone of Clark Kent, right? Although,
whether you want to consider Clark Kent underlyingly Superman, I don't want to. It
depends on your analysis, right? But at the very least, Clark Kent and Superman are allophones of
the same thing, whatever that actually is. Batman is an allophone of Bruce Wayne. Whatever Bruce
Wayne is, Batman is another version of the same thing, but you would probably argue that Batman,
Superman, and Will Styler are different phonemes. We are all fundamentally different. We could all
show up at the front of the same classroom, right? You could walk in and see Batman,
Superman, and me hanging out, chatting before class someday. Possible. Probably unlikely.
Possible, though. Or at least that's what I want you to think. So, these are three different
perspectives on phonemic analysis. You can look at the data and see when the meaning changes,
because the meaning will change when you get different phonemes. You can look at perception
and see what the changes are that listeners hear, and this will give you another perspective here.
And then you can look at the distribution, and you can see what sounds occur when.
This is phonemic analysis. Those are three different approaches to it.
And so, now let's ask one more time, one final time, how are you feeling about this material?
Maybe you feel like you've got it well. Maybe you're not quite sure if you get it.
Or maybe if you're down here, come to office hours. Come to a help session.
Seriously, you're not alone, and we love helping people with this, because the thing is,
usually this isn't, well, look, college is hard, generally speaking, right? If this were stuff you
knew already, you'd be on this video, not me, right? And so, very often, this is something
where it just, it requires it to be presented to you in the way that clicks with your brain,
and when it does, you're just like, oh, cool, I got it now. But don't feel any shame in it,
in any of this. This is tough. So, anyways, if you're feeling down here, come talk to us.
Free variation, this is just a nice way to think about this one more time.
A cute little chart here. So, if there is a pattern that predicts which sound occurs,
or does changing the sound change the meaning? These are the two variables here. So, free variation,
there is no pattern, it doesn't change meaning. Different allophones, there is a pattern,
it doesn't change meaning. Different phonemes, there is no pattern, it changes meaning.
Yeah, cool. And again, I'm not going to give you free variation on a homework or something like
that, because that would be really cruel. Anything that you're going to deal with is
either going to be allophones of the same phoneme, or two different phonemes.
Okay, so how do we do this in practice? We've talked about this now, but what do we actually
do? So, step one, as you're doing this process, if I hand you a data set, if I give you a bunch
of words, just like I've given you a couple of times here already, for instance, with the
dark L, light L data, and things like that. But if I give you a minimal pair where the meaning
changes, then the sounds are different phonemes. Your work is done. In the same sense that if you
walk into the room and you see Will and Batman there, you're like, well, there goes that theory,
and it's done. You know that they are different. So, if you have a minimal pair where the meaning
is changed, if you have mitt and pit, and they're differing only by that one sound,
then the sounds are different phonemes. Your work is done. Again, this bears repeating. If you have
a minimal pair, then the sounds are different phonemes, and your work is done. Get it? Bears
repeating? Okay. Anyways, so this is crucial. This is really important because the vault might
be unlocked. You have all of these cases. You've seen the movie, right, where somebody's, you know,
the safe cracker runs up to the door and starts, you know, listening to the lock and manipulating
it, and then, you know, the mustachioed badass walks over and just pulls it open because it was
unlocked the whole time, right? This is important. So, always, always, always check for minimal pairs
first. If you don't see minimal pairs, then we can proceed. So, first, check for minimal pairs.
Step zero before you do anything else. Second, collect all the environments that the sound you're
interested in can occur in. So, figure out where these sounds occur, one after the other, just like,
okay, this one occurs between these two vowels. This one occurs between a T and an O. This one
occurs between a T and an O. This one occurs between a D and an O, etc. Then, you state the
distribution of these sounds. Where does one occur? Where does the other one occur? And then,
you decide which of these allophones is the underlying form. You make a decision, and you say,
okay, it's easier for my life if I consider this one to be the allophone, I'm sorry, to be the
phoneme, and then, these two are predictable from it. Figure out which one is easy, hardest to
predict, make that underlying, and then, you write the rules that derive the other allophones from
that underlying form based on the environment. So, let's go through this step by step. First,
check for minimal pairs. Damn it. Second, collect the environment. So, take the sounds and write
down what follows them and precedes them. So, use the little underscore thing. So, for instance,
you could do something like, if we're looking at the word, if we're looking at this L here in this
data set, I might do, for instance, the L occurs here, so I write E underscore P. Well, in this
case, eh, because it's help, right? Eh underscore P. And then, where's the next L? Oh, here's one
between an ah and an oh. So, I would do ah underscore oh, et cetera. Are there other L's
here? All. So, I would do ah underscore end of the word. Use a little hashtag for that. So, anyways,
write down all the environments. Collect the environments. This just makes it easier for
your brain to kind of see, wait a second, I see a pattern here. All of these occur
before voice sounds. All of these occur at the end of a word. All of these occur, et cetera.
Next step is to state the distribution of the sounds. So, you would say something like, well,
wow, if I'm looking at this, I can't predict, for instance, where this particular form, I can't
predict where the M occurs in the data set here. It shows up in all of these various areas, but
every time I see the labiodental M, the M with the little tail hanging off the bottom of it,
that one always seems to occur before a labiodental sound. There you're just making
a claim. You're just saying, weird, all of these occur before labiodental sounds. Or with the
voiced, I'm sorry, the long vowel in English. Weird. Every long vowel occurs before a voiced
sound. So, that's a distribution, right? And sometimes you can't describe where the other
one happens. Sometimes it's hard to predict. Sometimes you can. Doesn't matter. But just try
it. Make a distribution, or I'm sorry, make a claim. Say this one only happens before voice
sounds. Then you look, you look, you look. Ah, crap, here's a voiced sound. It doesn't happen
before. So, then you can go back and you can say, okay, well, maybe it's not voiced sounds. Maybe
it's voiced, oh, maybe it's voiced stops. Because here it happened before, or it didn't happen
before a voiced liquid. So, test your hypotheses. Try to prove them wrong. Then at that point,
it's time, okay, I have this one occurs before voiced sounds. This one seems to occur everywhere
else. Then which one can't you predict really well? You know, which one is problematic? So,
we're just talking about M versus the labiodental M. You can't predict where M is going to show up.
It would be terrible to write a rule that tells us every place M is going to show up.
But we can very easily predict where M, where the labiodental version comes. So, we would just
choose that one. Say, my life is easier, and this feels a little bit like cheating, I'm going to be
real here. But say, my life is easier if this one is the underlying form. And then, there it is,
it's the underlying form. That's a part of your analysis. This is one of the moving parts that
you control as you are making a phonological analysis. And this is a tricky thing. Come on,
camera. Hi. There we go. This is a tricky thing, actually, in phonology. A lot of people are like,
well, what is it truthfully? I'm not sure. This is about analysis here. And so, you will usually
have one allophone that's predictable, and maybe another one that is the everywhere else. Just
like this one occurs everywhere else, but I know where this one happens. So, choose the everyone
else, or the everywhere else one. Then finally, write some rules to derive the other allophones
from that one, based on the environment. So, put differently, take that generalization that
you've already made. The long vowel seems to occur before voice sounds, and you turn that into a rule
form. And we'll talk a little bit more about writing rules soon. Actually, not next week,
next video. Whoops. But anyways, so, then you'll write that rule, and it'll help us to understand
exactly what happens. You'll write a rule that sounds like short vowels become long in the
environment of being before a long vowel. So, okay. There are all kinds of things that can make
these kinds of changes happen, right? There are all kinds of things that can motivate rules. One
of the biggest ones is an adjacent sound. So, for instance, we already saw the labiodental M thing.
Those happen before a labiodental sound. So, F or V will trigger an M to become labiodental. You'll
have M goes to labiodental M in the environment before a labiodental sound, generally. It could
be an adjacent type of sound. So, it could be before any voiced sound. It's not just before T,
or I'm sorry, it's not just before D, or M, or B. It's before any sound that is voiced. So, you can
have types of sound triggered. Word boundaries will very often trigger that. You'll get sounds
become voiceless at the end of a word, or rules that turn sounds voiceless at the end of a word.
Or you'll get vowels that are only rounded at the start of the word. You get things like that
happening. Word boundaries are a thing. Syllable boundaries are a thing. We've already talked about
this in English, actually, with the dark L, light L thing. And sometimes you'll get longer
distance effects. You'll get a sound that's earlier or later in the word triggering that
kind of thing. It's a little bit more rare, and we won't give you any of that in this class,
but it's really cool when it happens. So, let's actually look at a little bit of data here.
Let's look at L and N in Russian. So, here's a data set. This is your very first phonological
data set that you're expected to deal with. I encourage you to pause the video for a second,
and then go through the steps. Step one, check, I'm sorry, step zero is check for minimal pairs.
Step two, write out the environments. Look for the distributions. Step three,
state something about the generalization, or the distribution. Make some generalization
broadly. Step three is to then pick an underlying form. And step four, try and
write some kind of a rule in the form, this one turns into that one in the environment of
some other sound like that. So, pause the video right now and do it.
Okay, cool. So, now let's look at the data here. Are L and N allophones in Russian?
Step one to check. Well, step zero, are there minimal pairs? So, we can look here,
and we can say yellow, no. No. No. Whoa, hold on, back up. There's an L, followed by a Y,
that's a palatalized L, we'll get there. And then here's an N.
The only thing that differs there is the sound. Minimal pair. So, if these are minimal pairs,
where do we go from here? We're done, hallelujah, they're phonemes. We know that these two words,
because this means years and this means no, then it's very, very straightforward to say
these are two different phonemes. L and N are different phonemes in Russian. There is a minimal
pair. If L and N differ in meaning only by that one segment, they cannot be allophones.
So, they are different phonemes. How about vowel length in this language?
Oh, we already did this one. Cool. But the way you would do this, we can work through this one
together, is first check for minimal pairs. No, all of these things differ by more than just the
vowel length. Then we would look at the distribution here. We would see, okay,
long vowels are occurring between an S and a V, between a word boundary and a B, between an M and
a D, between an M and a Z, between a word boundary and a J, an H and a G. Okay, so we see that at the
end of that, those are all voiced. Okay, so then let's make a generalization. It sure looks like
all of the short vowels are followed by a voiceless sound. And in fact, I can look,
voiceless, voiceless, voiceless, voiceless, voiceless, voiceless. And then I look over here,
voiced, voiced, voiced, voiced, voiced, voiced, voiced. That's a good generalization. Which one
is underlying? In this case, it doesn't really matter, right? There's no real consequence of
choosing one or the other. So, we'll just say short is underlying. And then we can write a rule.
We can say, okay, short vowels become long before a voiced sound. And there we go. We're done.
Beautiful. English vowels are longer before a voiced sound. So, cool. Sound good? Let's talk
about writing these phonological rules. That's right, I moved into this video. So, you've figured
out that sounds are allophones of the same phoneme. Remember, you don't need a rule if they're
different phonemes, and you can't write a rule if it's free variation. So, the only time you're
writing a rule is if they're allophones, right? So, you know that these sounds are in a complementary
distribution. There's no minimal pairs, no sense that they're phonemes, and there is some kind of
pattern there. And so, you will have to predict which one shows up based on that environment.
And the big question with writing a rule is, well, okay, cool, I got a prediction. I've got a
generalization. How do I express that to somebody else? How do I show that to somebody else?
So, a phonological rule is just generalize, taking that generalization you've made. Something like,
well, all the long vowels occur before voice sounds, and turning it into a format that a
phonologist can read quickly, right? So, how do you write that out? And so, the format that we're
going to use here is x turns into y in the environment of z, right? This turns into this
in this condition. So, we have this little segment here, x arrow y, and this is an arrow, by the way,
it means x turns into y. So, if we have sound x, it turns into sound y. And I'm just using this
because it's easier to type. And then we have a little slash. And in this case, a single slash
means in the environment of. Because honestly, I don't want to type out in the environment of 50
times in the middle of a paper, right? And then you add in a blank. That blank represents where
the sound gets changed. It represents where the x would be and where the y ends up. That blank
ends up being where that sound should have been. And then you position that blank relative to
things in the conditioning environment. So, let's say we've got an n turning into a ng before a
velar sound. To start with, that makes a lot of sense, right? Something that is alveolar becoming
velar before a velar thing, yeah, peer pressure, right? Talk about that next time. So, the way we
would write that out is we would say the aliphon, I'm sorry, the phoneme n, the n phoneme becomes
the aliphone ng. So, we write that in brackets. So, slashes, brackets, in the environment of
before velar sounds. And for this class, you can just write velar sounds in brackets like this.
You'll want to write it in brackets, by the way, because otherwise, if you just write out velar
sounds, then I'm going to assume you mean before a v, a, l, a, r, r, in this case, and so forth.
So, you want to make sure you put anything that you're using as a descriptor in brackets so we
understand that you're talking about a whole, you know, you're talking about words there rather than
talking about sounds. So, n goes to ng in the environment of before velar sounds. And this
little guy is positioned before the sounds that modify it. If it happened after velar sounds,
we would swap those things around in the environment. So, we would say that still n
goes to ng. This part doesn't change. This is just describing the change. But in this case,
we would say the velar sounds, and then more specifically, it happens afterwards. So,
the underscore here goes after the velar sound because the change happens after a velar sound.
An n in this position changes into an engma, which is another name for this character, by the way.
So, there were a couple of other symbols you'll see around. So, the hashtag means,
or octothorpe, if you'd like to use the old term, means the boundary of a word. So, if you put that
in a rule, that means it's happening at the boundary of a word. So, you know, before a
word boundary would be underscore hashtag. V capitalized means any vowel. C capitalized means
any consonant. And then this little guy, the zero with a slash through it means nothing.
So, we'll talk about where that's useful. Namely, deletion and insertion. So,
if you delete a T, what you're actually doing is you're transforming T into nothingness, right? I
mean, that's a way to talk about deletion, right? Sounds kind of vaguely supervillain. I will
transform you into nothingness. And similarly, insertion is nothingness turning into a T,
right? There was nothing there, and suddenly it is a T. And actually, that should be in brackets,
not slashes. Whoops. So, nonetheless, visualize this in your mind in brackets, because this is on
the other side of the arrow. This is an allophone that's being inserted there. So, let's look at
some phonological rules. First, in real life, Bruce Wayne becomes Batman when surrounded by
crime. Because see, this is where the transformation happens, and crime is all around him,
right? White clothes should apparently disappear between Memorial Day and Labor Day. I can't
confirm this. It may not still be the fashion law, but this was what was taught to me at a
certain point in my life that I've since ignored. T goes to a dental form. Ah, that should be in
brackets. This goes to a dental T before a dental consonant. So, any dental consonant,
so an interdental sound in English, will change a T into, ah, brackets, into a dental T there.
A turns into a long A before voiced sounds. So, any time you have a sound that is plus voice,
that is voiced, and you can just write voiced sounds there as well. I'm just way too used to
writing the plus minus. You'll get there in Ling 111. But any time it is before a voiced sound,
the short vowel turns into the long vowel. And so, the underlying form here of any vowel
will become nasalized before a nasal. This actually should be pretty familiar to you.
This is what we talked about last time in speech perception, right? The fact that you get vowels
becoming nasalized before nasals is what allowed you to recover those codas as you was listening.
As you was listening. That's not my dialect, generally. Cool. It happened.
Maybe I need more tea. So, anyways, this is a rule saying vowels become nasalized,
with this little nasal diacritic up here, before nasals. So, sometimes you'll use entire groups of
sounds in your rules. And generally speaking, you'll want to do this, right? All of the groups
will share something. They'll have something in common. So, you might say, this happens before
voiceless sounds. This happens before velar sounds. This happens after consonants. This happens
consonants. This happens between high vowels. All of these things are in, they share a feature.
It's a natural class. So, you might have a rule like stops become fricatives before vac vowels.
The perfectly plausible rule that might happen in the world. Maybe a little weird,
but it doesn't really matter. But anyways, anytime you have a group of sounds that share
some feature together, maybe they're all back vowels, maybe they're all vowels,
maybe they're all consonants, maybe they're all voiced, maybe they're all
stops. All of those things form classes. They are groups of things that share a feature. And those
we can call a natural class. So, cool. You talk a lot more about these in Ling 111 phonology,
but for the moment, that's what we're going to touch on there. And for what it's worth,
we can use this same format to talk about different versions of a morpheme, right?
If you have multiple versions of the same chunk of meaning, then we can describe where they happen.
So, the English plural can be s, as in cats, z, as in dogs, or iz, as in dishes, right? So,
cats, dogs, and dishes have different plural forms. Similarly, the English past tense ed can be a t,
as in walked, a d, as in buzzed, or an id, as in rounded, right? And so, we can figure out rules
that would describe which causes each one of these to be a thing. And in fact, I'll leave
that as an exercise for you. It's a fun little thing. So, okay. No, actually, well, here. Here's
some data. There are three different kinds of English past tense marker. When do they appear?
When can you describe when you'll get a t versus a d versus an id? So, how would we do this? We
would start off by looking to see what's the environment here. So, here, t is occurring
at the end of a word. So, you do underscore, hashtag, because it's at the end of the word.
And it's before, or I'm sorry, it's following a k. Here, the t is following an s. Here, it's
following a k. Here, it's a sh. Here, it's an s. Okay. So, in this case, k, s, k, sh, s.
Now, for this one, again, what's on the other side is always going to be the end of the word,
and then hashtag there. So, we can look at this, and the d is coming before an n, or after an n,
an n, v, z, n. So, n, z, v, n, n. Okay. And then, finally, on the far end here,
we have rusted. And by the way, these are walked, sinned, rusted, passed, sunned,
oh, as in sunned on a rock, tufted, licked, gloved, boarded, washed, buzzed, pitted,
oh, like as in pitted with rust, and then loosed, as in I loosed the hounds on him,
stoned. Why did I use that example? And then sighted. But anyways, in rusted here, this
happens before a t. Here, it happens before a t. Here, it happens before a d, before a tap,
before a t. All right. So, we have our environment, right? So, what are some good generalizations?
Think about it for a moment. Pause it and think about what could describe all of those groups.
All right. So, a really good generalization for this one is k, s, k, sh, s, k, s, k, sh, s.
All of those are voiceless. All the t's seem to occur after voiceless sounds.
All of these are voiced, n, n, v, z, n. All the d's seem to occur after voiced sounds.
And then this guy over here that I can't reach to has a t, t, d, r, t. This isn't about voicing
anymore, because it's happening after both t's and d's, and after the tap. So, voiced and voiceless.
But what do those have in common? What's a natural class that all of those belong to?
The answer is alveolar sounds. So, you get t before voiced sounds, d before voiceless sounds,
and id, I'm sorry, after voiceless sounds, and id after alveolar sounds. So, when I click over here
again, we can look at it and do this. We can say this ending becomes a t before a voiceless sound,
d stays d before a voiced sound, and d becomes id after an alveolar stop or a tap,
or after an alveolar sound. Although, actually, we can't just say alveolar,
because it didn't work for n. Interesting. So, we have to test our rules. We have to work through
them over and over again. In practice, it's more complicated than this. We're not going to go too
deep into it, but this is a way to think about these data, and it's another set of data to look
at. Okay, how about, and then with liet and niet, we can write a separate set of rules here.
Or can we? No, there's a minimal pair. There is no rule that we can write. How about some Spanish
de and the? Let's look at this again. And again, we'll take a second here. So, we're trying to
figure out whether de and the are in complementary or contrastive distribution here. So, step zero,
look for minimal pairs. Nope. Okay, cool. So, then, chances are these are allophones, right?
So, then, okay, let's look at cases where de occurs. So, in the first one, de is occurring
between front of the word and ah. Second one, it's occurring between an a and the end of the word.
Third one, it's occurring between an a and the end of the word. Second, between de,
or between the front of the word and an a. And in this case, it's occurring between an n and an o.
All right. Cool. So, maybe some patterns. We're seeing a lot of front of the word,
back of the word stuff, but then there's that last one with an n and an o, right?
Let's look at this one. The eth here is occurring here between two vowels, ah and ah. Here,
it's occurring between two vowels, a and ah. Here, it's occurring between two vowels, a and a.
Here, it's occurring between two vowels, o and ah. Here, it's occurring between two vowels,
ah and a. Boy, that sure seems like a pattern, doesn't it? Is it any specific set of vowels?
No, because we see it occurring between a bunch of different vowels, right? In fact,
what seems to matter here is that the change is happening between two vowels. So, that's how we
might talk about the distribution. It sure seems like d sort of occurs where it occurs,
or at least it's harder to predict where d happens, but this guy occurs between two vowels.
And does that work? Do we see any cases of d occurring between two vowels? No. So, yeah,
that seems reasonable. So then, how would we write a rule for this? Or what would be
our underlying form, actually? Let's back up. Think about it for a second.
Think about it for a second. The question to ask yourself is, which one of these is easier
for you to deal with as an underlying form? Which one of these don't you want to predict?
Personally, I don't want to predict d, because here, it happens between the start of the word.
Here, it's the end of the word. Here, end of the word. Here, it's between an n and an o for some
reason. That seems like a pain in the neck, whereas this one, this is super easy to predict.
Anytime it's between two vowels, I can do that. So, let's choose d as the underlying form,
and let's make ev an allophone of that. So, we can write a rule for it. We can say d
becomes v in the environment between any two vowels. So, capital V underscore capital V
means between two vowels. By the way, this is the same thing we were looking at earlier with
cabo, right? So, b becomes v between two vowels, and in Spanish, by the way, g becomes g between
two vowels, as in las agas. So, voice stops, we can actually generalize this much bigger. We can
say voice stops become fricatives, and they're fricatives at the same place of articulation.
That doesn't change between vowels in Spanish. So, we could write that out, and that's beautiful.
That explains so much, and by the way, this explains why if you walk up to somebody and say,
for instance, cada for each, as you're speaking Spanish, you're going to come across as just
amazingly American, and it's not going to be so great. Oh, yeah, ceda. Yeah, no, no, no, ceda,
ceda. Anyways, so, we can write rules that talk about all of these changes, and in fact,
we can even generalize it more, and it's beautiful. And so, you are now doing phonology. Amazing,
right? Hopefully, you're feeling a lot better about this process. This has been a journey.
This has been an hour and eight minutes of joy together with us doing this phonology,
but if you're not, if you're still struggling, watch the next lecture. Maybe it'll help a little
bit, but come to office hours. Come talk to us. We desperately want to help you understand phonology
and to understand exactly why that's so beautiful, because it is. Oh, my God, it is.
So, anyways, we are more than happy to talk with you about any of this, but to wrap it all up,
phonology is the study of how sounds pattern. Phonemic analysis is how we determine which
sounds have some identity in the language, and which of those sounds are personas of other
sounds. I may be Batman, because you've never seen us in the same place, and phonology is fun.
You may not have this one yet, but give me time. Next time, we're going to talk about four common
phonological processes. We'll talk about phonotactics, and we'll look at some more data.
So, thank you all very, very much, and I will see you in the next video.
