Okay, hi everybody, and welcome to the second lecture on phonology.
This is a really old meme.
This comes from the days back in the world of memes where they mostly involved animals
and a lot of misspellings.
Yeah, I know, I'm old.
But anyways, this is an epenthetic cat.
That is, this cat has arrived between two cushions.
So zero turned into a cat between two cushions.
Cute.
So today we're going to go a little deeper into phonology and talk a little bit more
about some sound pattern stuff.
So first off, one really important note.
Signed languages have phonology too.
We've been talking about phonology exclusively in the world of spoken languages because,
well, frankly, a lot of the languages we're going to be working with this quarter are
spoken, right?
But this is very much a factor in signed language because signed language has articulators,
right?
It has different gestures.
It has different parts of the face.
It has different parts.
There are all kinds of things going on in signed language and adjacency can modify them
too.
If you're making a sign, for instance, that's very high up immediately before a sign that's
very low, then chances are the low sign is going to be a little bit more intermediate,
right?
There are laws governing the juxtaposition or not of gestures.
There are gestures that aren't legal next to each other, et cetera.
And so you can use the exact same principles and approaches to describe phonology in signed
language as you can in spoken language.
Phonology is very much a thing in signed language, even though it's not using the same
alveolar, velar, voiced, voiceless kind of thing that we're using in the rest of this
class.
So again, this should reinforce to you, signed language is very much language, even if it's
not the kind of language we're going to talk about most regularly in this class.
So today's plan to start with, we'll talk about some common phonological processes.
We'll think about them in a little bit more of a humanizing way.
Next thing we'll talk about syllables a little bit.
We'll talk about phonotactics, and we will talk about some actual work with language.
And actually, I'll probably break some of this off into another video, but I'll give
you a data set that you can chew on that is a real language data set, right?
And a little bit more, or a little more complicated.
So common phonological processes.
We now know, based on last week's work, or last, sorry, last lecture's work, how to describe
all of these various rules.
But the big question becomes, well, what do we do with them?
What are these rules actually doing in language?
Why do we have these rules?
Why do we bother?
Why would a language ever come up with an alternation?
Why would any of this happen?
This doesn't make any sense, a feeling that you can have, especially thinking about these
things in isolation.
But the thing is, these processes actually make a lot of sense, right?
These processes do things for us.
They make our lives easier.
And they make our lives easier in ways that we intuitively understand.
So today we're going to talk to start with about four different kinds of phonological
process.
One is assimilation.
The next is dissimilation.
The third is insertion or appenthesis.
These mean the same thing.
And then the final is deletion or elision.
And I'm going to explain all of these using high school drama, something that we are all
no doubt familiar with.
So assimilation.
Assimilation is when sounds change to become more like one another.
So chances are, if you've just watched the first phonology lecture, you can think of
a couple of cases where that might have happened, right?
So as we were thinking about the English past tense data, we saw a rule that said the past
tense becomes voiceless after a voiceless sound.
The past tense becomes voiced after a voiced sound.
Interesting, right?
So what could be doing this?
Or for instance, the M becomes labiodental before a labiodental sound.
This is peer pressure.
Flat out, this is peer pressure.
Assimilation is just a way for sounds to become a little bit more like their neighbors.
And so in the same way that all of the kids end up looking roughly the same in a given
click, all of the sounds end up looking roughly the same in the given area.
And so a really good example of this is with nasals.
Nasals, I love nasals.
I really do.
They're a source of incredible joy for me.
But they're really, really kind of pushovers, right?
A nasal sound will go wherever, you know, whatever place of articulation their friends
are doing, they'll do it too, right?
So if all the surrounding sounds say, oh my God, we're being dental.
You should try it.
The nasal is going to be like, yeah, cool, I'm an alveolar, no, I'm dental with you guys.
That's awesome.
So you get things like pine thugs, where the next word over has a th and the nasal is like,
you know what?
Yeah, I'll be dental.
That'll be fun.
All the cool kids are dental.
I'm going to be dental too.
But at the same time, the same nasal in pine becomes pine guys, pine guys.
So you get the same nasal becoming velar because all the cool kids are being velar.
So nasals really lack some element of identity.
A really extreme example of this are long distance harmony effects, where you get assimilation
that are not just local.
I've just been showing you examples of, you know, a nasal being affected by the thing
next to it.
Here's an example of an entire word becoming nasal because one of the words, I'm sorry,
one of the sounds in it is nasal.
So when other phones, when other sounds in the word change to match the nasality of a
nasal segment, we call this a nasal harmony approach.
So for instance, in this particular language here, you see this phenomenon of, well, if
I'm going to be nasal, you're all going to be nasal with me.
So this word, which underlyingly just has one nasal thing, ends up with a bunch of nasality
right over here.
This word, which underlyingly just has one nasal thing, ends up getting a whole bunch
more nasality.
So words have spreading nasality.
Dao, dao, underlyingly becomes dao, where the entire thing becomes nasal.
This is assimilation.
All of these harmony effects are assimilation.
And so this is described in this particular language, actually in a paper by Sharon Rose,
which who is a professor here and a good friend and a colleague.
And so you can take classes with her.
You might have Ling 111 with this very person, it's amazing.
But anyways, so this is an example of assimilation that's very, very strong.
This also happens with vowels.
Turkish speakers are going to be very well familiar with this.
So you get vowel harmony.
So for instance, in Turkish, you have a back front vowel harmony.
This means that within a given word, you will have either vowels that are from the front
or vowels from the back, but you're not going to get a mix of those things.
So all the vowels in a word need to either be all back or all front.
There's a lot of peer pressure.
Guys, we're being front vowels.
Okay, let's all be front vowels.
And so you can have, for instance, a word that is, where it changes.
So for instance, it is this dir suffix, and I'm sorry, my Turkish is non-existent, suddenly
changes when here, these are all front vowels in the word, but here it's not, right?
And so these vowels end up changing around a lot.
This is the same word, but the vowel in it keeps changing because the vowels in the surrounding
word are changing themselves.
So vowel harmony is a kind of assimilation where all of the vowels start to seem more
similar for phonological reasons, right?
So assimilation is just peer pressure, and it comes from a very reasonable place, right?
We want to be doing fewer things with articulators.
If I'm already making a dental sound, it's more efficient to just make the next sound
dental if I can, right?
If I'm already doing something velar, if my tongue's already back there, let's just make
the nasal velar too.
It's not hurting anything if no one understands it, or I'm sorry, and if no one has misunderstandings,
if it doesn't carry a contrast, let's just make it velar, I don't care.
And so peer pressure is a very real thing, much like in high school, in phonology.
And so this is a very common thing that you'll find making phonological rules happen.
Next one is dissimilation, which as you might expect is exactly the opposite.
It's when sounds change to become less like one another.
This is also known as a high school rebellion, right?
When you decide, hmm, I think I'm going to be goth.
And I know it doesn't always work that way, and of course, no hate on goth, right?
But nonetheless, you are going to have people who want to be very different from everybody
else.
You're going to want to have segments that aren't going to blend in with everybody else.
So in English, a good example of this is actually using deletion in R's.
So if I have a sentence like this, say this sentence aloud right now, go, go, yeah, the
third rural bird juror murdered a murd.
That's a lot of erotic, right?
That's a lot of R. The third rural bird juror murdered a murd.
You don't want to have that much R going on.
And so in English, we've actually changed some of our words to remove R's, to dissimilate
things.
So surprise is usually now pronounced surprised.
Same thing with berserk.
Generally, you just say he went berserk, right?
You don't say berserk because there's a lot of R going on in there.
And similarly, purple, the word purple for the color was originally purpure.
And so we change one of those R's into an L. We've dissimulated.
February is not February, even though it once was, it's now Febuary, bu rather than
brew.
Because that would be a whole lot of R, right, February, ay, ay, ay.
So anyways, that's a good example of dissimilation.
Another nice example of this was actually in the plural data that we were looking at
or in the past tense data, where you had like a past tense of dot being dotted rather than
dot-ed, dot-ed, or dot-ed, dot-ed.
You can't really hear when there are two alveolar sounds right next to each other, and more specifically
two alveolar stops.
So that past tense wouldn't work if it were dot-ed.
Like today I dot, yesterday I dot-ed, doesn't go.
So instead we add something else in there.
We insert something, which given is another one of the things we'll talk about, but we're
inserting a sound to make them less similar.
So we end up with dot-ed, dot-ed.
Or in dishes, the plural form, you don't get dishs, dishs, it's a lot of fricative right
next to each other.
So you get dish, and then add a vowel in, separate them out, dishes, right?
So actually that brings us into our next one, which is insertion or appentices.
Now remember, this can actually be done for dissimilation or for, usually for dissimilation,
but nonetheless insertion is a really important thing, and this happens all the time.
When a sound pops up to prevent something that is awkward or undesirable.
This is also known as showing up on a friend's bad date.
Perhaps you've been on a blind date, or perhaps a friend has been on a blind date where it's
just like, oh my god, this is terrible.
This person is talking about sounds, they're making weird noises, they're writing my name
in IPA, oh my god, what is this person even thinking?
Or maybe that's a great date.
I hope that's a great date, anyways, but anyways, you realize you're having a bad
date, and so you invite a friend over to pop up and prevent that.
The reason for this is very simple.
There's something awkward going on here.
There is a pairing that you don't like, and so you'd like something to come in and provide
a little bit of a buffer, right?
And so this is a good example in what we were just talking about here.
The allomorphs that include vowels are plurals.
So dish plus ss becomes dishes, because shs, dishs, dishs, or dishs is not acceptable.
That's not a good pairing.
So we add in that little ih sound there, and that makes it okay.
Or rot plus dh becomes rotted, rather than rotd, rotd, that can't be a thing.
So the vowel is popping in to stop these things from being a thing.
Languages also, look, languages have many passions, right?
Languages do many things around the world, but one of the very things that languages
generally hate is what's called hiatus, having two vowels next to one another.
When you have two vowels right there next to each other, so you'd have like a word like
waia, waia, that would not necessarily be desirable for most languages.
Usually they would rather that be something like wadida, wadida, or something like that.
So having multiple vowels next to each other is generally bad, and so a lot of languages
will put something up in the middle there.
Any time that you remove something that would give you two vowels next to each other, you
might reinsert something else to prevent it from happening.
Blocking hiatus is a really common thing that you'll see around the world, and so if you're
giving me a rule, for instance, in a homework, and the purpose of that rule is to prevent
two vowels from being next to each other, that's probably a really good rule.
That's probably pretty well attested around the world.
So allomorphs with vowels give us a nice example of popping a sound in there to separate things,
to make sure that the bad date is broken up.
Then finally there's deletion, or elision, which is when a sound is removed to stop an
awkward or an undesirable combination from occurring.
This is also known as uninviting your friend's ex from the party.
You've been planning this party for months, your friend says, oh yeah, here's the thing,
I broke up with Jeremy, and you decide, okay, hold on, Jeremy, okay, but I really like my
friend more, so you just say, hey, Jeremy, I'm sorry, we ran out of space, and I know
you're a vegetarian, and so we're having a gigantic pig, and he's going to be alive at
the start, anyways, I digress.
So you would find a way to make sure that that friend's ex doesn't show up at the party
and goes off on their own someplace elsewhere.
So deletion is trying, you're doing the same thing, you're saying, god, it's awkward for
these two things to be together, but rather than popping something up in between them,
you just say, you know what, yeah, you're uninvited.
And so this is a good example of this in English.
In the word fifths, fifths, fifths, you get this f-f-s, f-f-s thing, yeah, we're not doing
that, fifths, fifths, we just say fifths, where we get rid of that f entirely, we just
drop that out of there, and that makes lives a lot easier, because f-f-f-f, yeah, that's
awkward.
Similarly, family ends up being family, family, family.
You don't generally say, if I say, oh, me and my family are going, that's a little weird,
right?
You just say me and my family.
Um, comfortable, you don't generally say comfortable, comfortable, oh, I am very comfortable, and
I am in no way, shape, or form a lizard person.
Yeah, you would say comfortable, so you remove this com-fur-table, you just knock this little
er vowel out of there, and you end up with comfortable.
And in fact, in this case, there's a weird swap where that r moves to the other side.
Cool.
Anyways, um, so all of those are common phonological processes that we get.
We get peer pressure, making sounds more similar to one another.
We get dissimilation, where you're trying to pull sounds apart, you're trying to say,
no, no, no, there's too much similarity, you're all a bunch of conformists, I want to be different,
and so one of the sounds changes, or maybe you add something in, maybe you do an insertion
or an appenthesis, to break up an awkward combination, to make things less similar maybe,
or just when you've got two things that really shouldn't be together, or instead of adding
something in, you just uninvite, and unfriend, and next thing you know, that segment's not
anymore.
But all of these things are really important.
There are lots of other processes out there.
They're really awesome, but those four are very, very common.
You will very often find yourself writing rules that do appenthesis and deletion, and
writing rules that do things like creating assimilation, making sounds more similar,
creating dissimilation, making sounds less similar, or otherwise.
There's a reason, though, I'm humanizing these patterns.
Before you start looking for a rule, or looking for a pattern, you might think to yourself,
what's causing this, right?
If I give you a data set, and you identify the alternation, you're like, okay, so the
weird thing here is that all of these S's are turning into Z's, and in fact, weird,
so all these S's are turning into Z's, and all these SH sounds are turning into Z sounds,
so all of these voiceless things are becoming voiced.
If you're just thinking about this as like some weird form of algebra, which you can
certainly do, you can treat phonology sort of independently of that, I don't recommend it,
you're going to have trouble there, but if you think, okay, all of these voiceless things
are becoming voiced, why would that happen?
The first thing on your mind is going to be, well, maybe there's something voiced that's
making that they're becoming more alike, so you would think peer pressure, and so then
you would look, okay, is there something voiced after all of them?
There is.
Okay, cool, I know the pattern.
Life is good.
So, okay, for instance, let's do some thinking about this.
If a language changes a D into a T when it is next to a voiceless consonant, is this
an example of A, assimilation, B, dissimilation, C, insertion or appenthesis, or D, deletion
and elision?
Okay, so D becoming T next to a voiceless consonant, so D is voiced, T is voiceless,
and it's next to a voiceless consonant, yeah, peer pressure.
This is assimilation here.
So, those are your major phonological processes that we're going to be dealing with in 101
here, and it's just a reminder that any time you see something changing, ask, why would
this be happening?
Because very often that will make it easier as you're making hypotheses, as you're deciding,
hmm, I think I know why this is going on, because then you can make a more informed
guess.
Okay, now for something completely different, syllables.
So, a lot of what we're going to talk about this quarter in 101 is sort of a little different
than you might have grown up with, right?
We're going to talk about sentence diagramming, but chances are you didn't learn the kind
of sentence diagramming that we did in elementary school, or I'm sorry, you didn't learn the
kind that we're going to do here, right?
And similarly, maybe you learned some phonetic way of writing things in music school, but
it probably wasn't the IPA.
Syllables actually work pretty much the same way for us and for the rest of the world,
right?
Syllables are pretty important in some languages.
Not in all languages, but in some languages they're definitely a thing, and English is
among them.
English is a language where syllables are real, and we have a very intuitive sense of
syllables, right?
So, let's try it.
What I'd like you to do is to tell me how many syllables are in under.
There are a bunch of ways that you can do this.
Maybe you've been taught this already, but a couple of things you can do are to put your
hand under your chin here, under, under, uh.
And you're going to feel two major kind of pulses.
Your chin is going to move twice.
This really is counting vowels in practice, because your mouth opens more for vowels.
But that's one approach.
Another thing that you can do is try to kind of tap it out, so under, under, because it
doesn't make sense to do under, under.
It doesn't match, right?
Or under, no, so it's under, under, two syllables there.
So you have this break.
You have under, two different syllables.
Let's go with a bigger word here, decoagulate.
So decoagulate.
I should have given you more time to pause.
Either way, decoagulate, decoagulate, cool.
Here's a big one.
Here, work on it yourself.
Pause if you need to.
Okay, so you can do this in many ways.
But one way would be antipenultimate, antipenultimate.
Looks like six syllables, antipenultimate, yeah, cool.
Okay, six syllables, and in fact, that's the syllabic breakdown there.
And by the way, you have intuitions about this, right?
It's not ant, that's not valid.
It's antipenultimate.
It's not pen-ul, it's pen-ul-ti-mate, interesting, right?
But it's not ultim.
We have cool intuitions here.
So as linguists, we think about syllables in roughly the same way.
Counting syllables is very intuitive for most English speakers, but we break syllables apart
in a different way than maybe you're used to.
Syllables for linguists have three parts.
The sigma here just means a syllable in linguistics, so you'll see sigma appearing over and over
again talking about syllables, but we have three different parts of a syllable.
We have an onset.
This is a consonant that occurs before the nucleus.
It's the start of the syllable.
Then we have the nucleus.
This is almost always a vowel.
We'll talk about cases where it might not be later on, but it's almost always a vowel.
Then we have the coda.
That's the bit after the nucleus.
But the thing is, we actually break it into three parts because this feels a little bit
better.
We can think about it as onset, nucleus, coda all on one level, but it's better to think
about it as having this sort of subdivision, right?
Because we have this intuition of rhyming, right?
Cat and flat rhyme with one another.
Cat flat.
It's not the case, for instance, that cat and kit rhyme with each other.
No, those are different.
It has to share both the nucleus and the coda.
So we've broken the nucleus and the coda off into this one bigger area here, which we call
the rhyme.
You'll sometimes see it spelled with an R-H-Y.
That's fine.
They're basically the same thing.
But what we do here is we have the onset, and then the nucleus and coda form this separate
division called the rhyme, and a big part of the reason that we talk about it that way
is because we have this intuition, right, of rhyming involves a shared nucleus and coda.
These things are together.
So there is a theory underlying the syllable structure that we have here, but it's one
that works pretty well and makes a lot of sense.
So let's look at some syllables here and get a sense of what these act like.
So here's cat.
So cat is a single syllable, right?
The onset of it is kuh, and then the nucleus is a, and then the coda is tuh.
So the rhyme of this would be at.
Cool.
Makes sense.
Okay, T. You don't always have to have a coda, right?
So if I have T, which I do right here, we would have an onset, which is tuh, because
it comes before the nucleus.
We have a nucleus, which is e, because it's the vowel, and then there's nothing in the
coda.
So if I have teen, then there would be something in the coda.
There would be an N there, but because it's just T, then it's an onset and a nucleus.
That's all.
And because T, for instance, would rhyme with P or C, but it wouldn't necessarily rhyme
with bean, we know that the rhyme is different there.
So again, justification for the rhyme existing.
Eat is a word that doesn't have an onset.
There's e is the nucleus, and then the coda is tuh.
Eat.
Cool.
Then skip.
Skip has what's called a complex onset.
There's more than one thing in the onset here.
So you have skuh is the onset, ih is the nucleus, and puh is the coda.
Cool.
So here a complex onset is there.
We want to make sure that this, we don't have like suh onset, kuh, or kih as the nucleus.
No.
It's, complex onsets are a thing, complex codas are a thing, but, and in this case actually,
you've got a multi-syllables, but you're always going to have a vowel, by and large, with
some exceptions we'll talk about later on in the nucleus position.
Fences is a multi-syllabic word.
You've got two syllables here.
First one is fen, second one is sis.
So fuh is the onset, e nucleus, n the rhyme, well I'm sorry, in the coda that is, the rhyme
would be n, and then in the second syllable you get suh, ih, zuh, where suh is the onset,
is the nucleus, zuh is the coda.
So why is it broken up in this particular way?
That's actually a little trickier to talk about.
Why it is that you can't have n-sis as a syllable is something that's more of a Ling 111 kind
of question.
It's really cool.
I'd be happy to talk with you about it in office hours, but it's above and beyond the
call of duty today.
Now let's look at the biggest single syllable word in the English language, which is strengths.
In this case we have a very complex onset.
We have struh as our onset here, and then the nucleus is going to be e, and then our
coda is four different segments, n, kuh, fuh, suh.
All of those things go in the coda.
Rhyming with strengths is very difficult.
You need something like lengths, which has that same e, n, kuh, fuh thing.
But all of that together is the rhyme, and this is a very complex syllable, right?
Three consonant onset, a vowel nucleus, and then a four consonant coda.
That's big.
So phonological rules will very often reference syllables.
So for instance, the English L becomes darkened in the coda position.
This is a rule that we have in English.
Or for instance, the e vowel is illegal in words without a coda in English.
I can say wet just fine.
I can say ed, as in higher ed.
That's a perfectly fine word, or as in the name ed.
I can say s, as in the letter s.
That's fine.
But if I try to say keh, that doesn't work.
That couldn't be English.
If I gave you some brand new object, and I'm like, oh, this is a deh.
No, doesn't work.
In fact, the only thing that's available for that is meh.
That's not really a word, right?
It's an attitude.
It's a feeling.
It's a sensation.
So anyways, e is illegal when you don't have a coda consonant.
Spanish is really cool, because you will re-syllabify words
to turn codas into onsets.
Spanish really likes onsets, so they will turn codas into onsets.
So you get a sentence that, spoken very poorly,
would be van a gritar a las olas.
Instead, we'll get re-syllabified as van a, van a gritar a las olas.
Las olas.
Las olas.
So you get this n becomes van a, and this r, gritar a las olas.
So this is really cool.
And pardon my Spanish, by the way.
But this is an awesome thing that Spanish does,
and that English actually doesn't.
English syllabification doesn't really change that much,
depending on adjacent words.
So syllables are really important to think about,
and that's why we're talking to you about them more.
You'll spend more time on them in 111.
And in fact, the stuff you do in 111 with syllables is amazing.
I love 111.
I love 111 generally, for all she's just badass.
But I got to say, the syllable stuff is great.
So let's think about it for a second.
In the word star, in the English language,
the coda is which of these things?
A, st, B, a, C, r, er, er.
Sorry, I'm still in Spanish mode.
D, ar, or E, tar.
The word star, which of those is the coda?
The correct answer here is C, the r sound.
Because st is the onset, a is the nucleus,
and r, sorry, English, is the coda.
So another thing that uses syllables is English aspiration.
We've kind of been ignoring this all quarter.
We've talked about it very, very briefly.
But there's actually more to the T allophone than just the T.
Let's look at this data set right here.
So here we have a bunch of English words.
So we have what.
So on the very top here, I'll read the first column.
We have what, tar, pat, renting, Cuba, star.
Here we have skin, spun, spot, restart, pocket,
and spinster.
All of those words are English, and we
have some of those words with a little h after them.
These are aspirated stops.
So tar, pot, renting, I might have said pat there.
That's pot.
Renting, Cuba, pocket, and all of those have aspirated stops.
So look at these data for a second
and tell me when you get aspirated stops
and when you don't.
Pause the video.
Remember, you're doing phonological analysis here.
So step one, are there minimal pairs?
No, there are not.
Step two, look at the distributions.
See where all of those aspirated sounds occur.
Step three is going to be, or I'm sorry, technically step two.
Making a step zero is bad unless you speak Python natively.
It's a computer language.
I'm not a parcel of the mouth.
Sorry, Harry Potter reference.
Anyways, I'm like three levels of nerd deep.
Let's start.
So anyways, the next step, whatever
it would be, to make a generalization
about the distribution.
So we could look at this and go, OK, this one is happening.
Tar is happening at the start of a word.
Pot is happening at the start of the word.
Cuba is happening at the start of the word.
This one's happening at the start of the word.
OK, so maybe it's the start of the word.
But then you'd look and you'd say, renting.
Oh, damn, that's not at the start of the word.
Pocket, oh, it's not at the start of the word.
So we know that none of these aspirated stops
So we know that none of the unaspirated ones
happen at the start of the word.
But we also know that there are aspirated ones
that don't happen there.
So then we might think, OK, maybe it's
something to do with the syllable.
So we would have renting, renting.
So the syllable structure here is renting.
And in pocket, you'd have pocket.
So maybe it's at the start of a syllable.
And more specifically, you can't just say it's in the onset,
because things like spot or star don't have it.
So you would have to say it has to start the syllable.
It has to be the first sound in the onset.
If it is the first sound in the onset in English,
it will be aspirated, either P, T, or K.
But if it is not the first sound in the onset,
if it's the second sound in the onset,
or if it's not in the onset at all, it will not be.
So that is the rule.
T is aspirated at the start of a syllable,
not just in the onset.
So are P and K. And so we could give them a natural class.
And we could say, voiceless stops become aspirated
at the start of a syllable.
Cool.
So that's where syllables come in handy.
And different languages, by the way,
allow different syllable structures.
This is something that we've touched
on a little bit in the first lecture, actually.
But it's really important when we think about phonotactics.
So phonotactics kind of makes sense, right?
We've been talking about phone already as meaning sound.
And then tactics, it's like, what, strategy?
Well, not exactly.
But nonetheless, it's how you work
with sounds in that language.
What's allowable with sounds in a language is phonotactics.
The study of what sounds and combinations of sounds
are legal in a given language is phonotactics.
So every language has a set of phonemes
that are used in that language.
This is called a language's phonemic inventory.
This is the sounds that are available in that language that
are legal and that are contrastive.
It's a phonemic inventory, not an allophonic inventory.
You'll sometimes hear phonological inventory.
These mean the same things.
The IPA chart that I gave you for 101
that has some things grayed out is basically
a phonemic inventory for English.
I've added a couple of allophones in there,
namely the TAP, which is on its way
to being phonemic in English.
It's not there yet, though.
But every language has a phonemic inventory.
And you can probably find it at this website.
If you're interested in a language,
if you, for instance, grew up speaking a language,
you can often find it either on FOIBL more directly,
or you can look at the Wikipedia page
on, for instance, Turkish phonology or otherwise,
and you'll very often see exactly that.
It'll sometimes be arrayed with the writing system.
Sometimes you can't even do that.
But you'll be able to find the phonemic inventory
someplace online.
And it's really useful.
So for instance, this is a language
with a very small phonemic inventory.
This is Pirahan.
This is a language that we've talked about before.
This is the language that is postulated
not to have recursion by somebody.
It has a very small inventory.
It has p, b, t.
I'm sorry, a dental t.
It has k and g, a glottal stop, and h.
Ah, it's pretty tiny, right?
Hawaiian improves that just a little bit,
gets a few more sounds.
P, m, n, s, l, k, glottal stop, and then an h,
a glottal fricative.
Mandarin has more.
Mandarin has p, m, f, s, t, n, r, l, y, h,
which is a sound that we don't have in English,
although we kind of do in Bach and Loch and things like that.
K and g, I'm sorry, n and k.
Note, interestingly, no b's, no d's, et cetera.
They can show up, but they're allophonic.
Urdu is a language with even more in their phonemic
inventories.
You've got dental t and d, n, r.
You've got the r sound.
You've got retroflex sounds, k, d, r.
In this case was a, I'm sorry, that's a tap, not a r there.
You have palatal fricatives, a, h, a, y.
You have palatal approximant, y, h, r.
And then you have a uvular, a, k, as well as the glottal.
So you've got even more sounds here in Urdu relative to English.
Malayalam is a language which has an amazing phonological inventory
because you have a dental versus alveolar contrast.
So t and t, t, t are different sounds in Malayalam.
And then t, t, so that was dental, alveolar, t, retroflex, t, palatal, k,
velar.
You have a bunch of contrasts here.
So English doesn't do dental versus alveolar.
Malayalam does.
And in fact, it does it for everything.
It does n, n, n, a, n, n, n.
Cool.
And this inventory is really important because it
tells you what phonemes are legal to use.
It tells you what's on the menu for this language.
It tells you what the options are when you've got a bunch of alternations.
And it will play a big role in your analysis.
But the fun thing about this is that it really complicates word borrowings.
So Hawaiian, we're just talking about Hawaiian.
It has a tiny little consonant inventory.
Hawaiian has p, m, s, n, k, l, glottal stop, and h.
That's it.
Compared to English, which has a lot more.
So what happens when Hawaiian borrows English words?
What happens?
What goes on when a Hawaiian speaker decides, you know what?
I want this English word.
What happens is something like this.
All of these sounds here, t, d, f, j, d, s, z, j, ch, j, k, and g,
all become k.
Anything of p, b, and f, p, b, f, all become a p.
N and ng both become n.
M becomes m.
This is a really kind of complicated process.
We can think about it this way, but let's just look at some borrowings here.
OK, what's this word?
Iniseka.
Iniseka.
One other thing that's worth noting is that Hawaiian also
constrains syllable structure a lot.
In this case, you're not allowed, really,
to have much in the way of anything beyond consonant-vowel,
consonant-vowel.
So all of these crazy codas that we've got in English,
not going to fly here.
So iniseka.
Any thoughts?
Insect.
The word insect was borrowed as iniseka.
Elepani.
This one's usually a little easier.
Elephant.
They got rid of that final t altogether, and so you just ended up with ele.
OK, we're good here.
Fa, oh, no, fa's not a thing.
Let's just make that a p.
OK, ah, no, we're good there.
Nt, no.
Let's just get rid of that t.
And so, cool.
Hippa.
Immediately, you're going to say hippo, but no.
Sheep.
Yeah, because you've got that e there.
Hippa is sheep.
Kayoke.
Kayoke, I suppose.
Coyote.
Nice.
Kanakalu.
Kanakalu.
Kangaroo.
Oh, yeah.
Lacuna.
Lacuna.
Raccoon.
Where are my sixth college people at?
And although sixth has now moved, the raccoons won't be there anymore.
That'll be, oh.
Anyways, sorry, I'm technically assigned a sixth as faculty,
so I know the raccoon lore.
So lacuna is raccoon.
Nupepa.
This is not an animal, but a daily life object.
Well, in the past, I suppose.
The correct answer here is newspaper.
They've gotten rid of the wz, z, as gotten all together,
so it's just nupepa.
Mokokaikala.
Motorcycle.
Nice.
Moko.
So moto becomes moko.
Kaikala.
Completely get rid of that r.
Who needs it?
Kaikala.
Yeah, cycle.
Kaikala.
Sure.
And then again, has to be, you can't end with an l,
because that's the syllable constraint.
So you have to say kaikala.
Add that l at the end, or the a at the end there.
Kakalina.
Give you a hint.
You might put it in your mokokaikala.
Mokokaikala, I suppose.
Gasoline.
Kelepona.
I'm going to call you on my kelepona.
Telephone.
Kolokalaiwa.
This is kind of a stranger one.
Kolokalaiwa.
Screwdriver.
Now this is fun.
See, you've gotten rid of the initial s, right?
It's not skolokalaiwa, because sk, illegal.
And because s turns into k anyways,
so you've got sk just becomes k.
And then that r there becomes an l.
So you get the skra becomes kolokalaiwa.
So then you get the driver, kalaiwa,
so that the k, the d becomes a k, the r becomes an l,
and then aiwa, and then you get rid of that final r,
because who needs it anyways?
Really cool.
But the other thing is that language
differ in terms of combinations they allow.
You get combinations that may or may not be legal.
So in English, for instance, some sounds
can't happen at the start of ender words.
Some sound combinations can't happen.
Some syllable structures are favored or prevented.
English has some weird constraints, actually.
We have h, right, in the word happy, hobby, hurt.
All of those things start with an h, h.
We can't end a word with h in English.
The word bah isn't a thing.
If I invent a new object, it's never going to be a teh.
That doesn't work.
You know this is, anyways.
Teh couldn't be a thing, right?
This sound, the ng in ring, can't go at the start of a word.
We can't have, we can have ring, but we can't have ngir.
Ngir doesn't work.
Similarly, there's a Vietnamese last name,
Nguyen, which is pronounced, or I'm sorry,
is written N-G, usually N-G-U-Y-E-N.
Nguyen is not pronounced Nguyen, please.
Nguyen, it starts with a ng sound.
And then you end up with, or there's
a Tibetan spiritual tradition, ngondro,
which English speakers have nothing for.
You get ngondro, like, eh, eh.
Okay, you cannot end a word with a vowel in bet or book.
We've already talked about this a little bit,
but this is why we butcher the word sake.
We'll say sake, want some sake or sake?
No, sake.
S-K and V all work, but we're not willing to say Moskva.
Moskva, so we end up with Moscow.
No, Moskva is the name of Moscow, the Russian city, right?
And other languages have these too,
and these come into play when we're borrowing words.
Languages adapt words to fit the phonotactic constraints
when borrowing.
We saw this already with Hawaiian,
and we've looked at it with English here.
But for instance, Japanese has a syllable constraint
that says CV syllables, dammit.
You give me an onset, you give me a nucleus, and then stop.
That's it, just onset, nucleus, no, no codas, no codas.
And in fact, around the world, generally,
languages aren't as big a fan of codas.
It's much more common to have languages
that do not allow codas than to have a language
that doesn't, I don't think there are languages
that do not allow an onset, right?
But codas are generally something languages
are trying to get rid of in life.
In fact, this is how Chinese got tone, among other things.
Well, certainly it's how Vietnamese got tone.
I believe Chinese also got their tone from lack of codas.
But anyways, super common.
It's how French got vowel nasality too.
Anyways, this means that borrowing from English,
which doesn't have a constraint like that,
is very complicated.
So if we look at Japanese, we could have,
this Merry Christmas gets borrowed as.
Merry Christmas.
Merry Christmas.
Merry Christmas.
Interesting.
So Merry works fine, right?
That's okay.
But then Christmas is getting borrowed with,
all of the consonants are still there.
So kuh, kuh, ri, ri.
So you get kuh-ri.
And I'm mispronouncing this vowel.
I deeply apologize, Japanese speakers.
I am not a Japanese speaker.
But so you see the K, you see the R sound here.
You see the E, suh, good.
We're losing the T in there.
The stuh, absolutely not gonna fly.
But then you get kuh-ri-suh, ma.
Okay, good, we can deal with that.
And then a final S isn't gonna fly.
So you're gonna get suh at the very end there.
So Merry Christmas is going to be
how you would pronounce that in Japanese.
They have borrowed our English word,
which has all kinds of consonant clustery stuff going on.
And they've done it in a way
that works with local laws, so to speak.
And there are languages out there
that allow a lot more complexity in syllables.
For instance, in English, we've already talked about sixths.
Sixths, oof.
Four consonants in a coda, really?
Oof.
So C-V-C-C-C, or C-C-C-C.
This is a big ol' coda right there.
Strengths has three consonants
and then four at the end of it.
That's crazy.
Russian goes a little bit heavier, right?
So you get vzglyat, where you have a four-consonant onset.
Vzglya.
Vzglya.
Vzglya.
And if you want to consider the y
a completely different thing, then yeah.
Anyways, we'll talk about that.
But vzglyat has a four-consonant onset,
which is serious business.
Or streytelstv ends up with a four-consonant coda there
that English is not coming anywhere near.
The elstv, elstv, stv,
doesn't get to fly with English.
No, no way.
Czech we talked about actually in the very first day,
but Czech does something that English will do as well.
It has syllabic consonants,
where you have an entire word that is just consonants.
So strt, strt, prst, skrt, krk.
Strt, prst, skrt, krk.
All of those are consonants.
In this case, actually,
the r is forming the nucleus of the syllable.
So this c right here is the nucleus of the syllable.
The third consonant is the nucleus there.
And similarly, the second consonant in prst,
it's prst, is the coda.
So that can be a thing.
And English can do this too.
So for instance, able.
This little dot under the l here,
it means this is a syllabic consonant.
A syllabic consonant is just a consonant
that is decided to put on its vowel pants that day.
It gets up and like, you know what?
This word needs a second vowel.
I will rise to the challenge.
And so able needs a second thing
because bl isn't a legal coda in English.
Inevitable, bl, bl, bl, doesn't fly.
So instead we have to do another syllable there.
So able, bl, where l is the nucleus of the second syllable.
We have a, and then a second syllable, which is bl.
Fun games, fun games, fun and games, fun games.
You're not saying fun and games by and large.
Oh, come to the department welcome party.
There'll be fun and games.
Not this year.
Fun games is,
that middle n there isn't actually and.
It's just a new word that is just a syllabic n.
Fun and games, fun and games.
So that right there is a consonant there.
And in fact, we can do this in other words too,
like, oh, there are lots of syllabic consonants
out there in the world.
But English does this as well,
but it's especially prominent in Czech
when you get these big long sentences
or big long sequences without vowels at all.
So this is, all of this is just scratching
the very surface of phonology.
Seriously, phonology is a big and really rich subfield.
There is a lot of joy in phonology.
I could have very easily found a happy home in phonology.
We are here, phonology is this.
And you can go so very, very deep down the rabbit hole.
It's just amazing.
Ling 111 is where you will go to start with this.
You will get a really good overview
of all of the various different phonological ideas here.
You'll get deeper into the theory of phonology,
how it is that you wanna choose those features
that make up those classes,
how it is that you wanna write rules
and the kinds of things that you'll need to write rules for
that will make things a little easier.
So a definite plug for 111 here.
That's a great class and you'll have a lot of fun with it.
But in order to do well in Ling 111,
or frankly in 101,
you're gonna need practice doing these analysis.
So I will see you in the class session for more.
And I'm also going to make a video
where I go through this data set here.
But this data set is something you can pause and write down
or just pause the video and work through it.
But this is a data set asking you here,
buh, or I'm sorry, these three sounds,
ruh, luh, and guh are in complimentary distribution
with buh, duh, and guh.
Look at this data set,
which is from a very, very old version
of the Bantu languages spoken in South Africa.
And tell me whether these are,
you know, basically what's the distribution?
How do we know which one should be where?
And we'll work through this one together
in a separate video.
But for now, that's all I've got for you today.
So thank you very much.
And next week, we will move on to morphology,
go from the sounds up to the words,
and it's gonna be awesome.
Have a wonderful rest of your day, bye.
