Hi everybody, today we're going to talk about morphology, and we'll get a little deeper
into how words work, but first I have a public service announcement for you.
And that is simple.
Back up your computers.
Seriously, your computer will die.
It will happen, sooner or later.
Whether this is due to it being lost, it being stolen, you spilling a glass of water on it,
or just the hard drive dying due to old age, it is very, very possible that your computer
could die, and that it could die way sooner than you expect.
So it's very important as you're kind of dealing with this, and as you're thinking
about this, to take steps to back things up.
If your hard drive or computer failed tomorrow, what would you do?
So good ideas are do things like keep important and non-private documents on Google Drive.
Buy an external drive and back up the whole machine.
And by the way, things like viruses and ransomware are a factor too, and they can absolutely
affect you.
And because you have free utilities, if you get an external drive, and they're not that
pricey these days, you can use Time Machine or Windows Backup.
Any backup is better than no backup.
You can also use professional services, like Backblaze, or just use R-Sync, or something
like that, depending on how nerdy you want to get with it.
But back up your computer.
Your computer will die someday.
Please, be prepared.
And the reason I bring this up is because every year, I get, you know, two or three
students, oh my God, I just lost everything.
I'm going to need an extra two weeks in the pay—and look, I get it, but you can avoid
these things.
So do.
Okay.
Now, beside the point rant over, let's talk a little bit about morphology.
And morphology is how words are built, right?
So we'll start off talking about what morphology is.
We'll talk about types of morphemes.
We'll talk about types of words.
We'll talk about the process for building new words.
And we'll talk about derivational and inflectional morphology, and how languages construct words.
So what is morphology, generally speaking?
Well, think about it this way.
We've been kind of working our way up the chain, so to speak.
We started off the class by thinking about speech sounds, right, phonetics.
And then we used those to make bigger chunks, combinations of them, patterns in phonology.
Now we're going to take those chunks of sound, and we're going to turn them into bits of
meaning.
So morphology is the study of, well, words.
It's the study of the shape and the formation of words, is one way to think about it.
Basically, we're concerned with, you know, this thing here, study, that's a word.
Is it one piece?
Is it multiple pieces?
What about formation, or words, plural?
How do we deal with this?
So in English, words are not entirely monolithic.
What I mean by that is that an individual word in English might have multiple parts.
It might have one chunk, and then a second part later on.
And we detect these components by looking for correspondences across multiple words.
We try and find correspondences between form and meaning.
We try to find, okay, all of these words have an S at the end.
They're all plural.
That's weird.
But if the same meaning keeps showing up in the same form in a word and across other words,
that chunk of little form must carry meaning, right?
So English plurals are a nice example of this.
We have cat, a little furry thing, and then cats.
We have sit, and then sits.
We have pat versus pats.
It sure looks like in all of those cases, all of these things are plural.
I'm sorry, seats, not sits.
And then this is pot versus pots.
Wow, I'm not an IPA brain at the moment.
But nonetheless, what we see here is all of these things are plural, and all of these
things are singular.
So when we add an S at the end, that sure looks meaningful, right?
This means, this S at the end means there's more than one of something.
That's a morpheme.
That's a meaningful chunk.
And any recurring chunk of a word, or a whole word for that matter, that seems to have some
meaning is what's called a morpheme in linguistics.
And so a morpheme is the smallest piece of a word that expresses a meaning or a function.
A morpheme is a little tiny chunk of linguistic material that carries meaning.
I'm going to be talking about it in terms of sound, but you have morphemes even within
a sign language context.
So nonetheless, it is a chunk of language that carries a meaning, and it is the smallest
chunk of language that carries a meaning.
And so a lot of words in English are composed of different morphemes, and every morpheme
contributes to the word's meaning overall.
So you get played, for instance, as a word, has play, which is the verb here, play, as
in, oh, I'm going to go playing.
And then id gives you past tense.
You have cats, which is cat, the fuzzy thing, plus the plural marker, showing us that there
is more than one of them.
You get blacken, which is the black, an adjective, plus this cause to become in suffix that we
can see elsewhere.
We can see darken, deepen, what else can you, redden, et cetera.
All of those things work as this cause to become.
So we know that this is a chunk, and black is a chunk that works on its own, too.
Or even unroll.
You have this unchunk, which always seems to occur at the start of words where you're
undoing what happened, kind of like the word undo, but in this case, it's paired with the
roll.
So it is the reverse of to roll.
Older is a comparative, so it's old plus this comparative marker.
So there are lots of morphemes in words on occasion.
English actually tends to have relatively few morphemes per word compared to other languages.
We'll talk about this a little bit more later on, but still, lots of words are composed
of many morphemes.
And there are two different kinds of morpheme that we're going to talk about this quarter.
There are bound morphemes and free morphemes.
So a free morpheme can stand on its own.
It doesn't have to attach to anything else.
So an example of this would be cat, or show, or class, panda, walk, purple.
I can have all of those things on their own.
I can say, hey, that's a nice panda you've got there.
Or, wow, aren't you glad you're in class right now?
Kind of, I guess.
You're watching a show, at least.
But all of those things can stand on their own.
We can contrast these with bound morphemes.
These are morphemes that cannot stand on their own.
In order for them to exist, they must be attached to another morpheme.
So these are things like id, s, ing, ur, un, aholic, twit, and cran.
We'll talk about all of these later on, but you see chunks of these elsewhere.
You see cran in cranberry, cran apple.
You see ing in walking, running, eating.
You see the past tense.
You see ur, refrigerator, come on, a mugger.
I have a mug.
That's not exactly the meaning of it, right?
But still, it works out.
So bound morphemes are also called affixes, and they're really useful.
And we can break them apart into different types, right?
So we have prefixes, which go before the root.
They go before the main chunk of the word.
So a prefix goes before.
So like redo, re is a prefix, unscrew, un is a prefix, overcome, over would be a prefix
there.
A suffix goes after the root.
So like walked, cats, ending, those things go after the root.
You have infixes, which go inside the root.
And so, for instance, in the Khmer language, you end up with leun versus lebun, which gives
you something.
This be goes into the root.
You insert it literally inside there.
And then circumfixes go to either side of the root.
So like, for instance, in German, you have spielen is to play, and then gespielt gives
you play.
So you get the g and the t on both sides.
And if you don't have either component of it, it doesn't have the same meaning.
So it needs to go to either side.
So these are the four kinds of bound morphemes that we generally talk about in linguistics,
right?
And here's another way to think about it.
This is a postmalone, a premalone, a circummalone, and an inmalone, the little lines are to either
side there.
Anyways, beside the point.
So the er in refrigerator.
Is this example of a, a prefix, b, a suffix, c, an infix, d, a circumfix, or e, a bushfix?
Think about it for a second.
So the er in refrigerator would be an example of a suffix.
It's occurring at the end of the word.
Easy.
Okay.
So morphemes.
Good.
The thing is though, there are a lot of kinds of morphemes and those morphemes can be in
many forms, not only just bound and free, but they can accomplish many tasks.
And so I want you to think for a second, and we're going to think for a second about the
things that certain morphemes accomplish within sentences, the things that certain words accomplish
within sentences.
So what are words anyways?
Turns out that word is tricky.
Turns out that word is one of those things that is actually surprisingly difficult to
really get a good sense of for linguists.
And it's not just because we're weird, although certainly that's there.
Word is sticky.
We know that they're made up of morphemes.
Sometimes just one.
So for instance, just is made of one morpheme.
You could probably argue that sometimes is two.
It's some plus times, it's compound.
We'll spend some time later or there later today, but once constructed, a word can have
many different types.
It can have many different roles in a sentence.
And these are what we refer to as lexical categories.
You know what these are, actually.
You've been taught this before likely in your life, but we're going to give them different
names.
You might have heard them as parts of speech.
These are types of words that occur in language, and these are functional types.
These are things that these words can do for us in a given situation, maybe in a given
syntactic construction, maybe just in a sentence overall.
And so we have different kinds of lexical categories.
We have things like nouns, like bike or car, cat, dog, tofu, bling.
The old thing is person, place, or animal, right?
Yeah, so nouns.
Verbs are actions, right?
Go, eat, walk, and talk.
Adjectives are things like lit, or sweet, or hot, or cool, or awesome.
All of those things are effective adjectives.
Adverbs are things like well, fast, slowly, easily.
All of these things are useful, and I mean well here in the sense of he ran well relative
to his competitors.
But in the sense of I feel well today, in that case it's actually an adjective.
You get prepositions, which are, in English we have prepositions, in other languages you
have postpositions.
The question is just where it occurs.
A preposition goes before the thing it's describing, a postposition goes afterwards.
So you get prepositions like with, or from, or on, or in.
We can continue with determiners.
Determiners are things like the, a, this, that, those.
Conjunctions are things like she, him, her, it, I, you, they.
We're familiar with these.
Conjunctions, conjunction, junctions, what are your functions?
Well, in this case, they're connecting things, like and, or, or, or whenever, or while.
All of those things are conjunctions.
Numerals give us number, right?
One, twice, third.
And by the way, note that numerals can be either a cardinal, one, or ordinal, or iterative,
or things like that.
So you can get that.
Interjections are things like ow, tsk, dammit, oof, is one of my very favorite interjections.
Use it a lot, a lot lately.
So anyways, these are different kinds of lexical categories.
So how do we identify them?
I mean, some of them are pretty easy, right?
The dog is the one that everybody always uses for nouns, so that one's good.
Or walk, oh yeah, I bet that's a verb.
But how do you deal with ones that are a little bit more borderline?
I'm going to give you a set of generalizations that work well for English, but there are
other versions of these that are available for other languages.
So nouns.
Nouns describe generally a person, a place, or a thing.
And thing, by the way, can of course be something very conceptual, like dignity.
That's still a noun, right?
But one way to test is whether it's singular or plural.
Whether it can be singular or plural.
So for instance, I can have book, and I can have books.
Cool.
I can have car, or I can have cars.
I can pluralize that.
But I can't pluralize quickly, right?
Quickly's doesn't work.
And I can't pluralize beg.
I can't have two begs.
Like I can't say, well sure, I'll give you 20 bucks, but I need two begs first.
That doesn't quite make sense.
I guess I can coerce it.
But here's an interesting one.
Red.
Like the color.
You can have two reds, can't you?
Yeah.
Like if you walk into a paint store, you could say something like, oh, we were looking for
a color for that living room accent wall, so we were torn between two reds.
But in that case, red is actually a noun there.
And in most cases, red is an adjective.
Like I saw the red car.
So remember that English can swap these things around pretty regularly.
You can also pair things with a determiner if it's a noun.
So for instance, I like the book.
I like the car.
I like the cat.
I like the show.
I like all of these things make sense, right?
But I like the angry?
Doesn't work.
I like the rotate.
Nope.
I like the beg.
No.
I like the begging.
You can turn it into a noun, but you can't just say I like the beg.
I like the quickly.
No.
You can't do that.
That doesn't work.
So nouns, you can usually make either singular or plural, and you can usually pair them with
a determiner.
By the way, there are, of course, some nouns that can't become plural.
So for instance, dignity is weird, right?
You hurt my dignity.
Although I guess you might be able to say something like, you know, both John and I
felt insulted.
Our dignities were suffering greatly.
You know, still.
You can do those things with nouns generally.
Verbs.
A good way to tell is they take tense marking, right?
So in English, we use tense to talk about past versus present.
So I could say he rotates on a regular basis.
She rotated.
She rotated into San Diego last month, and now she's heading to Singapore.
Learns and learned.
Again, present, or well, habitual, present, and the past tense.
Both work.
But you can't do that to an adjective.
I can't say he angries.
Or he angried when I stole his water bottle.
It doesn't work that way.
You'd have to use a verb.
Like he angers easily.
Or he angered when I stole his presenting remote.
You can also get these things working with modals.
I'm a modal.
I'm will.
I'm a modal.
So, and actually that makes life a little weird.
Anyways, we'll get there later.
But I can, so you can say, for instance, I will fly.
That's a verb, right?
But I will angry doesn't work, right?
I can run.
That's another modal, can.
But you can't say I can cat.
It's worth noting, by the way, that we, there's a construction that's come up recently of
I can't noun, which turns it into a verb.
So you can say something like I can't adult today.
Like I'm sorry, I'm tired, I'm angry, I'm sick.
I can't adult today.
Or I can't linguist anymore.
This is a possibility.
But generally speaking, what we're doing is we're turning the noun into a verb.
So that has become a verb.
It's taking on the verb role.
And again, this gets at something very important here.
As you're thinking about these lexical categories, think about these not in terms of these are
inherent and inalienable qualities of the thing, of the word itself.
Think about these as roles that they're playing.
So in I can't adult today, that's being, adult is being a verb.
Not usually a verb, but this time it is.
Cool.
Language.
Magic.
So adjectives.
Adjectives you can do comparative constructions with.
Like I'm happy.
Now I'm happier.
But you know, unless fly is an adjective, as in wow, she's fly, you can't get that.
You can't say fly as a verb and then flyer.
If you do, that becomes flyer, as in like a person who flies.
That's a different thing altogether.
Angry and angrier works, but cat and catter doesn't work.
You couldn't say, for instance, oh, I have two cats.
I like them both.
But Fluffy's a little catter than Mittens.
No, it doesn't work out that well.
So there you go.
Superlative constructions.
Mad versus maddest.
You can, again, do this.
You can say I'm mad, but he was the maddest person in the room.
But you wouldn't say, you know, oh, I come from L.A. every day.
I am the commutest person you know.
Doesn't fly.
You could say I have the longest commute, but that's because long is an adjective.
Purple and purplest works, but you wouldn't say, oh, that's the penguinest penguin I've
ever seen.
No, doesn't fly.
Very and to constructions work as well.
Oh, that's very bad.
I'm very angry.
That's very purple.
Oh, that's very ugly.
But you wouldn't necessarily say, unless it's an adjective, that's very fly.
That's very cat.
That's very linguist.
Again, we can coerce this.
We can force these things to be adjectives.
I could say, oh, wow, you're looking very fly.
Or you know, you curled up in the sunlight.
That's very cat of you.
Or wow, what a nerd.
Very linguist.
That outfit is very linguist.
But so we can do this.
We can use words in other categories, but that's a different thing fundamentally.
And you also will get words that don't fit the pattern.
So for instance, elegant.
Elegant is an adjective, right?
You look very elegant.
It passes that test, but it doesn't take a superlative, nor does it take a comparative.
So I can't say, she was the elegantest person in the room.
Or oh, wow, you look way eleganter with the new watch.
I don't know.
I cutted the bush.
Again, that doesn't take tense marking.
In fact, what's going on there is that the tense marking is invisible.
You don't even see it there.
You just get, I cut the bush.
So there are definitely things that happen.
Oh, and of course, sheep doesn't take a plural, because the plural of sheep is sheep for some
reason.
Go home, English.
You're drunk.
We'll talk about that next week.
Adverbs.
Suck.
People have referred to them as the most nebulous and puzzling of the traditional word classes.
It sounds about right.
They can modify pretty much anything that's not nominal, anything that is not a noun.
So for instance, you can have an adverb modifying a verb.
We happily study.
You can have an adverb modifying an adjective.
We are studying a very interesting topic.
You can have an adverb modifying another adverb.
We are unbelievably happily, or we study linguistics unbelievably happily.
Which is cool.
And you can have a whole sentence adverb.
We're studying linguistics now.
Or sadly, we're not studying linguistics tomorrow.
We're studying particle physics.
Particle physics is cool.
But not as cool as linguistics.
Just saying, guys.
Anyways.
So there are many, many flavors of adverbs.
One of them, for instance, is temporal.
There are temporal adverbs that tell us things about time.
So like now.
You know, hey, come over now.
I have the thing ready.
Or then.
Oh, I didn't see her then.
Yesterday.
Always.
Tomorrow.
Next week.
All of these things are adverbs.
Next week, you should come by.
You're saying in the future.
Locative adverbs are things like, oh, here.
As in, oh, you should come here, rather than going there.
You should study abroad.
Actually you should.
As a linguist, actually, it's a really good idea.
And you can get, we work really well with the study abroad program.
Just a little plug there.
Anyways.
Sentence adverbs are things like perhaps.
Perhaps we will go to the park.
Really modifies the entire thing, right?
It means that maybe we'll go to the park.
Maybe we won't.
Fortunately, again, fortunately, we were taking linguistics.
So we had a fun class this quarter.
Etc.
Okay.
I'm biased.
I don't care.
Quickly.
Will quickly revealed his bias and carefully ignored it.
All of these things are manner adverbs.
They tell us how we're doing something.
Linking adverbs.
I love these.
So, you know, oh, well, here's this, this, this, and this, therefore, I'm right.
More consequently, degree adverbs, we've been playing around with, like, very happy,
very angry, very et cetera, extremely, extraordinarily, unprecedentedly, unprecedentedly, eh, wasn't
a word much before this year anyways.
So prepositions are a different thing, too.
Prepositions tell us that there is a relationship of meaning, a semantic relationship, a relationship
of meaning between other entities.
So for instance, the joke is that prepositions have any relationship that a squirrel can
have with a tree.
And this seems silly, but it's really not.
So if this is our tree and this is a squirrel, squirrel can be next to the tree, right?
Can be behind the tree or, well, in this case, in front of the tree, can be behind the tree.
It can be, it can run around the tree.
It can be in the tree.
It can be on the tree at the very top there.
It can be under the tree.
It can be, you know, between the tree and a house.
Prepositions usually give us some kind of a semantic relationship.
There are other kinds of prepositions that can be useful, too, but by and large, these
are going to be locative in English very often.
They don't change form in English is one of the keys that you're looking at a preposition.
There's really nothing you can do to change a preposition around.
You'll never get underer or, you know, oh, the squirrel was underer a tree or the squirrel
undered the tree.
No, it's a preposition.
Doesn't do that.
Pronouns.
And they substitute in for noun phrases.
So for instance, I could say, I saw the girl who Katie noticed was carrying a hamster in
her backpack.
Or I could just say, I saw her.
Her, in this case, is standing in for this entire chunk, for this entire the gal who
Katie noticed was carrying a hamster in her backpack.
That entire thing is her now.
So we can have that stand in for that.
And there are lots of pronouns.
There are personal pronouns.
So for instance, first person would be I, me, or mine.
Second person is you or yours.
And then pronouns in third person are things like she, her, hers, he, him, his, they, them,
theirs, and plenty of others.
And there are all kinds of pronoun sets out there.
But the thing is, these are all kinds of personal pronouns.
They refer to a specific person.
Indefinite pronouns are things like somebody, everybody, nobody.
These are things that you use when you don't exactly know who they refer to, right?
So you could say something like, someone stole my, someone stole my tea.
Who was it?
Well, probably my wife.
She's the only other person in the house.
But somebody did.
Maybe somebody broke in late at night.
I don't know.
Or everybody loves linguistics.
I don't know exactly who that means, because I don't know who everybody is.
But I do know that they all love linguistics, because of course they do.
It's linguistics, right?
And nobody, similarly, nobody dislikes linguistics.
Interrogative pronouns are things that substitute in for things you don't know.
So you saw who at the park?
You saw what at the park?
You saw them where?
When did you see them?
All of those things substitute in for missing pieces of information.
You saw who at the park?
Could substitute in for, I saw Ashwini at the park.
Great.
You saw what at the park?
I saw a hot air balloon being launched.
That's the what.
Where did you see it?
Oh, behind the, I want to say patio.
That's not a thing.
I want to say ballista, but that's not remotely the thing.
Yes, behind the medieval siege equipment.
Yes, that's where I saw it.
I saw it behind the ballista at the park.
That's exactly what I'm, gazebo.
Why did ballista and gazebo?
The mind is a magical place.
And when did you see it?
Yesterday.
Ballista.
Okay, relative pronouns.
I saw the girl who knew the cat that ate the bird which I was watching.
All of these things are relative visors.
They are giving us bigger chunks.
The girl who knew the cat that ate the bird that I was watching, that's one big chunk
right there.
And then that ate the bird which I was watching is describing the cat.
So this sentence that comes afterwards is all describing this girl.
So these are relative pronouns.
We'll play around with those more when we get into syntax actually.
That'll make things fun.
Then demonstratives, things like this or these or that or those.
If I say something like, oh, I want tea.
And you were to say, oh, which tea?
I could point to one specifically and say, I want that tea right there or something like
that.
Or, you know, oh, you know, yeah, you know what these work.
You know what these work.
You know how.
How these work.
Haha.
Wrong pronoun.
Anyways.
Determiners.
Determiners mark and precede nouns.
In the English language, they precede nouns.
In other languages, they might come after.
But for instance, in English, you get the or a are both determiners.
So I saw the interesting book or I saw an interesting book.
I saw those cookies right there.
By the way, the difference between those as a determiner and those as a pronoun is that
those as a pronoun would just fill in for that.
The I saw those last week rather than I saw those cookies, in which case it's a determiner.
Which movie did you see is acting as a determiner there?
Although it's also an interrogative pronoun, determiners, by the way, do not vary in form
as well.
You can get a versus an.
But beyond that, it doesn't change.
And that's just phonological.
You don't want two vowels next to each other.
Whoa.
I remember that from the last phonology lecture.
Amazing.
Hypenthesis.
All right.
And so we have in English a bunch of kinds of determiners.
You have possessive determiners like, oh, do you have my tea?
No, no, I don't.
Oh, you've got her tea, though.
Oh, what's our favorite subject this week or etc.
Demonstratives.
I saw this cat versus that cat versus the other cat versus those cats over there.
Interrogative pronoun or determiners.
Which cat did you see?
So it's not just an interrogative pronoun, but it's like you saw which?
No, you saw which cat.
Definite pronouns or the in English and then indefinite pronouns are a and an.
I, of course, have a favorite determiner joke, a and the walk into a bar.
They sit down.
They start drinking.
And the says, you know, I'm sorry, says to the.
So what are you up to lately?
Are you still marking noun phrases?
And the says, yeah, definitely.
Yeah, because it's a definite determiner.
But the thing is, this this definiteness is important.
And what I mean by that is definite marks something that we know, right?
If I say, for instance, oh, I saw the cat yesterday.
Your assumption is going to be that that's a cat we have shared knowledge about, right?
Your assumption is going to be, oh, it must be the cat, you know, across the way who I
can sometimes see from my kitchen window.
It's that cat versus if I just say I saw a cat yesterday.
It's unclear.
It could have been a cat outside on the street.
It could have been a cat, you know, as I was walking around in the park.
It just it's a cat.
As opposed to the cat, which we have knowledge of, or, for instance, oh, where's the car
means, oh, well, it's probably in the garage or, oh, it's over by the by the Starbucks,
as opposed to where's a car all around us, I guess.
Which one do you mean?
I mean, by the way, this this can have fun semantics, too.
For instance, what does it mean if somebody walks up to you and says, hey, did you go
to the store today?
So that usually probably means the grocery store or the store that you go to most often.
Maybe if your main store is a Target or something like that.
Oh, did you go to the store?
Or maybe there's a pre-agreed store.
You know, oh, I need you to go to the Apple store tomorrow.
Later on, you might ask, oh, did you go to the store?
But still, definiteness implies that we share that knowledge.
So good pronouns, happy determiners, happy conjunctions.
OK, conjunctions are used to link expressions.
So for instance, sunny and warm means both sunny and warm at the same time.
It's not just one of those things.
It's both as opposed to red or blue, which means one of these things is true, but not
the other one.
You can't have if I say, oh, is it going to be sunny or warm tomorrow?
That's kind of weird, right?
It would imply that there's either going to be warmth or sun, but you wouldn't have both
while can be a conjunction, too.
He rolled over while I was petting him.
This joins two sentences together with a temporal relationship.
So we can practice a little bit here.
The tiny dog scurried quickly between the buildings.
What is it?
A noun, B verb, C adjective, D preposition, E adverb.
So tiny, tiny, we could, for instance, add an intensifier to.
We could say the tiniest dog quickly scurried, boom, adjective.
That's going to be an adjective.
How about dog?
Noun verb, adjective, preposition, adverb.
Dog is a noun because you could add a plural marker to it if you wanted to, and it's kind
of stereotypical now, right?
Noun verb, adjective, preposition, adverb.
So you can't change its form.
That's one sign.
Adverb, adverb, because it is modifying the scurrying.
As a result, we have an adverb here.
Scurried, in this case, scurried.
What is this?
Noun verb, adjective, preposition, adverb.
This is a verb, and we know it's a verb because it's taking a tense marking right there.
Between, ah, again, it can't change, can't take any other kind of thing.
This is a preposition.
It's describing a relationship between two objects.
In this case, the relationship between the dog and the buildings.
So cool.
There you go.
Problem solved.
All languages have grammatical categories of some kind.
The lines between them can be very blurry.
For instance, English actually has relatively blurry lines in terms of these because, well,
we can adverb verbs and noun, and we can change categories very, very quickly.
This happens, and some languages don't necessarily use all of the categories, right?
There are some languages that really don't have determiners, or, you know, it's a thing,
but the concept of grammatical categories is pretty universal, and we use it extensively
in syntax, which we'll be going into next time.
But we can group these categories, actually, into larger sets.
We can think about nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs as being content words.
They're telling us things about the world.
They're telling us things about the situation.
You know, if I'm describing a situation to you, I'm going to be using these things, and
that's going to be describing the main players, the main actions, their natures, their methods,
et cetera, as opposed to things like prepositions and postpositions, determiners, pronouns,
conjunctions.
All of these things are function words.
These are used among all of our content words here to give grammatical information.
We use prepositions to tell us relationships between content words.
We use determiners to give us information about the content words.
Pronouns stand in for content words.
Conjunctions can help unite groupings of content words.
This is a very small set.
It is a very finite set.
There are a limited number of prepositions, determiners, pronouns, conjunctions.
All of those are function words, as opposed to content words, which is a huge set.
It is ever-growing.
It is constantly growing, and they change differently in languages.
We very, very rarely gain a new function word.
We very rarely gain a new determiner or a preposition or a pronoun or a conjunction,
but we often gain brand-new content words, things like nouns and verbs and adjectives
and adverbs, and so function words are what we call in linguistics a closed class.
That means that we're not liable to get more of them any time soon, as opposed to an open
class where we can add new ones any time we'd like.
I can make up a brand-new content word at any given moment.
Hey, this is a sprangle, and it works.
It makes sense, right?
So new function words, like I said, are pretty rare, but they're not impossible.
So for instance, we have a new preposition in because.
I didn't see the island because Michael Bay.
Generally, previous generations might have said something like, I didn't see the island
because of Michael Bay or because Michael Bay was the director.
But in this case, actually, we've changed that into a preposition.
So the relationship between the island and seeing the island and Michael Bay is because.
I spent the last night in the library doing homework slash looking at pictures of cats.
This one actually is newer than me, so to speak.
What I've been told by people is, generally speaking, what this means is not you are doing
homework and looking at pictures of cats.
Instead, this means you were doing homework nominally, but actually you were looking at
pictures of cats.
So slash, in this case, gives me a new conjunction, saying the thing in front of this is stuff
that I was supposed to be doing or that I would claim I'm doing.
The stuff after it is stuff I was actually doing, right?
But new content words, super common all the time.
Bay, brand new, didn't exist before.
Twerk, that's a brand new content word.
Came about five, ten years ago, maybe?
Wrecked.
Yeah, absolutely.
This is maybe five years old or so.
Totes, relatively newish.
Yeet.
Oh, that's a new one.
But this brings us to a big question, like, okay, cool, we've got a list of these words
and we know that the function words, we're not going to be getting new ones up, but how
do you really create a new content word?
How does that happen, anyways?
So let's think a little bit about word creation.
Actually, I'm going to give you a second to think of any questions that come up, to sit
on things.
And by the way, always feel free to pause.
And I'm going to drink some water.
Okay.
Creating new words.
How do we do that?
Well, we have a bunch of different ways to do that.
I'd like to talk about some of the approaches that we use, generally speaking, in language
to make a new word.
We'll talk about a few of the most common ones, but there are lots more out there.
And if you want, take Ling 120, Morphology, you'll spend more time looking at that.
So compounding existing words together.
One example of this came up recently-ish, the Taint team, as an idea of a group of prosecutors
who are seeing all of the documents in a case, including the ones that are not legal to be
looking at, and then they are the ones who are doing triage and saying to the real group
of prosecutors, these are the ones you can see.
So the Taint team is a group of people who are tainted by documents that they're not
allowed to see if they were the real prosecutors.
So it's a separate legal team designed to handle evidence.
A brownout is, hey, hey, hey, California.
This is not a blackout, but it is a partial blackout, where power isn't quite lost, but
the power quality goes way down.
Key and high key.
These are relatively new things, but we've stitched two words together.
We have low and key put down together, and high key as well.
So two words clamped together, we get subtly or at a low level, or the opposite.
A side piece is a piece of romantic interest, shall we say, outside of your primary relationship.
So your side piece, this is a combination of the words side and piece.
And we know that this is a separate word, right?
You would talk about your side piece, because you can't talk about other variants.
It's not like you have a side piece, a front piece, a back piece.
No, it's just, this is a single chunk.
We just happen to use a space in it.
Turns out whether or not there's a space in a word actually isn't all that important as
to whether it's a word or not, which, again, morphology, oh boy, morphology.
Or we could talk about that in class.
Just feel free to get me going.
Binge watch, another great one.
It combines the word binge, which is an existing thing, with watching, and then we get to watch
a series all at once.
So binge watching is a compound word.
All of these are different compounds.
There are lots of compounds in life.
That's a laptop right there, right?
Lap top.
Lap top.
Oh, didn't mean to do that.
There are also blends.
A blend is where you take several words and you combine them together.
So a trendetarian is somebody who eats whatever is trendy.
You've combined trendy and vegetarian.
A staycation is when you stay at home, but you're taking a vacation, right?
When I told everybody, you know what, in August, screw you, I don't exist.
Go away.
That was a staycation.
A frenemy is a combination of a friend and an enemy.
Somebody who you're really close with, but you're probably enemies, but you're also very
congenial.
It's a frenemy, right?
To mansplain is to condescendingly explain something, and this is a blend of man and
explain.
I try hard not to, but yeah.
So mansplain is a thing, and then twerk.
Now many people don't believe this to be a blend, but I've heard that this is a blend
of twist and jerk originally.
Whether that's true or not, these things can actually be very difficult to figure out,
but this is one of the many accepted etymologies for the word twerk, is that it could be a
blend of twist and jerk.
So these are blends.
Here's a good example of a blend.
This is a drog.
Yeah, cursed.
All right, so borrowing words from other languages is another way that we get words.
So for instance, burrito comes from Spanish, right?
We originally, that was a food item there.
Now it's a food item here.
A croissant is French, of course.
Uber cute.
This uber chunk, this little morpheme here, is German originally.
Kawaii is Japanese, of course, and means cute of some variety, kind of a very specific cute,
I think.
Chocolate is actually a borrowing from Nahua, which is chocolat, chocolat, that is, sorry.
So that's originally Nahua.
So all of these are words that we just saw from another language, like hey, pretty nice
word you got there.
Shame if something were to happen to it.
And so English does this a bunch, a bunch.
Clipping is another thing that happens with existing words.
So this is where you take an existing word and you chop it down.
So for instance, family has given us fam, as in hey, what's up fam?
A little socially interesting, but it's a thing from family.
Pog or poggers.
So oddly enough, I grew up in an era where pogs were a thing.
Like a game where you throw metal objects at paper objects.
Look, it was about as cool as it sounded, right?
I wish I'd had iPads.
But anyways, this comes from the Twitch emote pogchamp, originally.
And so pogchamp, being an original emote put in there, became pog and then poggers.
So both of these things are clips down from pogchamp.
Bougie, or no matter how you want to spell it, comes from bourgeoisie, or bourgeois perhaps,
depending on how you'd like to look at it.
So like, I was feeling bougie, so I got bread from Whole Foods the other day.
Something like that.
Drip is from dripping.
And actually, you could maybe even argue it's clipped down from the sentence as in, and
this is from usually rap slang of like having a great deal of diamonds or gold or things
like that, or fancy watches, as in you're dripping with gold.
So drip is something like, oh, you know, I would never leave the house not wearing my
drip if I'm trying to seem super classy or something like that.
Or, I don't know, fancy, something.
He caught an L. That was a really cool one.
So an L is short for a loss.
And so we clip L down to loss, or I'm sorry, loss down to L. So cool, right?
Then you can change the part of speech.
So that's clipping.
Take something big, make it shorter.
Changing the part of speech of an existing word is another way that you can do this.
So you start off, for instance, with woke.
Woke is already, was already a thing, but it was a verb, generally speaking.
Now it's a noun, or in some cases, actually, it's an adjective.
You could talk about somebody being woke.
I guess, actually, usually it would be an adjective these days.
So woke would be down, or would be an adjective, like, oh, you're very woke.
You pay attention to social justice issues.
I'm staying home because lazy.
Went from a conjunction to a preposition.
I don't want to adult today, or I forgot how to linguist would be a noun to a verb.
Change a part of speech.
And Stan, by the way, I Stan Morris Halley.
Not quite that creepy, but this was a very, very well-known phonologist.
And so it's sort of an obsessive fandom.
Actually originally, one could make an argument that, you know, Stan was originally a name.
This is a reference, actually, to an Eminem song that came out back when I listened to
Eminem.
But anyways, there was a song called Stan, and that has since become to Stan, to have
an almost unhealthy obsession with the work of somebody.
So noun becomes a verb there.
And then I can't even.
In that case, an adverb has become a verb.
And by the way, you can't even.
All right.
So all of those things are changes in part of speech.
Then there are acronyms.
So acronyms and initialisms are two different things.
We're going to talk about them as two different things because they are two different things.
But an acronym is pronounceable, whereas an initialism is not.
So an acronym is something like Wi-Fi.
I don't say W-I-F-I.
Like, hey, what is the password for the W-I-F-I?
No, that doesn't work.
This is actually pulled down from wireless fidelity.
Nobody knows this, but it's a thing.
GOAT is an acronym these days, although you don't always capitalize it anymore, but means
greatest of all time.
So like Sabrina Williams is the GOAT in tennis.
NASA is from National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
You've taken the first chunk of all of these words and created something pronounceable
from it.
In Wi-Fi, actually, you took the first chunk of two words and then chunked them together.
We'll still call it an acronym.
And then THOT, apparently, and again, this is another one of those where the origin of
it is in debate.
But THOT originally came from, I'm told, that hoe over there.
And so THOT came from there.
And then actually WAP is, of course, short for Wireless Application Protocol, although
it's worth noting that acronyms can mean different things to different people.
So initialisms are a different thing.
Initialisms are pronounced as a series of letters.
So UCSD is an initialism, right?
Standing for, hopefully you are all aware, University of California at San Diego.
Or UC, actually, is itself an initialism.
FBI is the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
And note that it's not UXD.
If it were UXD, it would be an acronym, but it's an initialism instead.
FB, nope.
IPA, International Phonetic Alphabet, although some weirdos think it's beer.
But either way, these are initialisms.
And so initialisms are pronounced as a series of letters, unlike acronyms.
And so it's important to know which of these are which, right?
And in fact, it's the case that occasionally WAP is used for Wireless Access Protocol,
whereas WAP is often used for Wireless Application Protocol.
It's weird, as well as for other things.
But nonetheless, you'll see things that are both, but often they'll have different meanings.
And then finally, you can just make up a brand new word, like bling.
As far as I'm aware, there is no origin of bling, right?
It's not the case that it was shortened down from anything else.
It's just bling.
And it means, actually, relatively similar to what drip means now.
Bling, I think, is a pretty old word now.
Doggo.
You would cop a...
It's coming from dog, obviously.
It's a type of dog.
It's a cute way to refer to a dog, but the go thing doesn't make sense.
You're not like compounding.
It's not like a dog that's moving quickly.
No, doggo is just sort of its own thing.
A dongle.
A dongle, of course, being a piece of technology that...
Oh, come on.
Where is my...
I have a whole host of dongles around.
It's a dongle, right?
It has all your various ports on there, and it connects to your computer.
That is a dongle.
And the dongle has become, thanks, Apple, a big part of life lately.
So it's a word of its own now.
Ooh.
As far as I know, it's kind of out of nowhere.
I mean, actually, one could argue that it's art imitating the...
Or writing system imitating art.
But as a result, it is a brand new made-up thing.
HODL.
HODL is an interesting word.
If you were in the cryptocurrency world, oddly enough, that's where this thing occurs.
And it basically was originally a typo for hold on to your Bitcoin.
People have turned it into a backronym.
They've claimed that it's...
Oh, what is it?
They've given an explanation for this.
Where, oh, H means this, et cetera.
But this is just a typo that has become codified, right?
Now HODL is a thing in, like, the Bitcoin world.
Oh, the market's looking bad.
I should sell.
No, HODL.
Anyways.
So there's that.
And then, of course, you can take an existing word, and you can add a new sense to it.
You can use it in a different way.
So for instance, snack, when I grew up, aging, used to just mean a granola bar, something
like that.
Whereas you can call somebody a snack, and you're referring to them as being sexually
desirable in some way.
Tasty food becomes a tasty human.
The analogy is very strong there, right?
It makes a lot of sense.
Cancelled comes originally from, like, cancelling a series, or cancelling an event.
But now you can cancel people.
So oh, you know, who's gotten cancelled lately?
Oh, all kinds of people.
But either way, cancellation is where somebody has said or done something that people find
abhorrent, and therefore they're no longer really tolerating that person.
That person isn't welcome in the public sphere.
Turned or wrecked.
Both of these are Twitch kind of things.
But these are coming from, actually, interestingly, both of these have new spellings.
So this comes originally from turned, and wrecked means, for instance, I got messed
up.
I was wrecked, with a W-R-E-C-K, but in Twitch you'll often say wrecked.
Like, ooh, you got wrecked in that round.
That lit, of course, used to mean just with a lighter, right?
I lit the fire, now you light the party.
You would never say light the party, wow, I'm old.
And then to flex on somebody.
Flex originally just meant this, and now flex could mean, oh, well, you know, you did pretty
good in college.
You know, mind you, I got a 4.2 GPA, so, you know, but I don't want to flex, right?
So show off your skills or possessions or means.
I mean, originally, it kind of makes sense, right?
If I had muscles, then I could flex on you all and show, but nerd, right?
But the thing is, this is a reminder that a single spoken word can have many meanings.
The word meanings is down right off the screen there, and it's amazing.
But a single spoken word can have many, many meanings.
So okay, cool.
Now we've got a bunch of these word creation methods.
We've got compounding, where you add two words together, like laptop.
You've got blending, where you blend two words together, where parts of each of the words
are present, but it's not the whole words snap together, as in compounding.
So this would be like trenditarian.
Borrowing from other languages, like burrito.
Changing the part of speech, like, for instance, lit or woke or something like that.
A clipping is where you take something down, like fam.
Acronyms and initialisms, like NASA or the NSA.
Making it up entirely, like on fleek.
On fleek is another good one, meaning you're really on fire today.
I'm on fleek in this lecture.
Kind of, maybe, you tell me.
Changing the meaning of an existing word is another way to create new words.
So think about, and you're going to be actually answering during one of your discussion questions
other new words.
So think about new words that I've missed, and think about what variety of thing they
are.
How were they created?
Which of these strategies were used to create those new words that you're aware of?
I'll update the lecture next time.
See, that way I don't seem quite as old.
Ah, stonks.
Oh, that's a good one, actually.
Stonks.
Sorry.
This is a meme reference, and, like, half the class is probably going, stonks?
That's not even a thing.
Is that, like, a stork?
This came about, God, in, like, April of 2020 or something like that.
Reference to one bad image, but it's sort of like, I am doing very well but poorly at
the same time.
It's hard to say, but either way, yeah, stonks would be interesting.
Which of these would that be, actually?
Take a second here.
This is going to be in that weird making it up category, because it's not like you've
added it that N isn't coming from anywhere or anything like that.
So I would probably put it in there with doggo, right?
Okay.
So we've been talking about building new words.
The next question is how do you create a new form of a word to use in a sentence?
What we've been talking about so far is, you know, derivational morphology.
Taking an affix that changes something about the root, changes something about the meaning.
You're adding something to a word that will completely change some element of that root.
The meaning changes won't necessarily apply to all words, and they're also sometimes unpredictable.
So here's an example.
Control as a verb, you add in that "-able," and it becomes controllable, meaning it is
something that you are able to control.
Amaze becomes amazement when you add that "-ment," on the end there.
Joy can become joyful, right?
Teach can become teacher.
You're adding that suffix at the end there that makes it the thing that does the teaching,
right?
I'm a thing.
Anyways, roll and unroll.
Here you're not changing the part of speech at all, but you're changing the meaning.
When you add "-un," it means that you're doing exactly the opposite, or you're undoing
that thing that you were doing there.
Write and rewrite.
Adding that "-re-" adds an element of repetition to it.
So for instance, I re-parked the car after I screwed up the first parking job.
You add that "-re-" on there, and it gives it a new meaning.
Fair can become unfair.
And so again, adjective to adjective, but it's saying it's the opposite meaning.
So all of these are derivational.
You're creating a new word that you might use again in the future, right?
So if I have a teach, or if I have teach as a verb, I might have a teacher.
If I have something that blocks somebody, then that would be a blocker, right?
If I have somebody who installs firewalls, they could be a firewaller, right?
That's a thing.
Maybe, maybe.
It's probably a thing, right?
So that's derivational morphology.
You're creating new words to use in the long term.
You're adding something new to the dictionary.
Here's another way to think about it.
Compare this to inflectional morphology.
Inflectional morphology changes the meaning of the word in a very predictable way, but
it's not changing part of speech.
It's not changing the meaning of the word in a very deep way.
Inflectional morphology, another way to think about this, is that derivational morphology
adds things to the dictionary.
It's giving us new words to use in the future, whereas inflectional morphology is just adding
something new right now for us to use.
I'm just changing the form a little bit to match this sentence.
So for instance, the plural marking is inflectional.
I say cat.
Oh no, now there's two of them.
There are cats.
Oh, that's a wug.
Now there are two of them.
Those are wugs.
I'm adding on that plural marker.
It's not creating a brand new thing, right?
It's not the case that if I look in the dictionary under cat, there's going to be one thing,
and if I look under cats, there's going to be another.
No.
They're the same thing.
It's just one of them is being marked as plural in this sentence.
Same thing with verb tense.
We sing versus ... I'm sorry, this is verb inflection.
We sing versus he sings.
So we've added on that's at the end that shows that this is the third person form for English.
This is done in that particular sentence, but it's not a new verb.
Here's tense.
He walked versus ... he walks, that is, versus he walked.
We're changing the tense of the verb here.
It's not, again, it's not creating a new verb.
It's just changing the tense.
So inflectional morphology is really common around the world.
So for instance, in this particular language, you have, and I believe it's xanti, you end
up with hot as one word, and then hotu as another word, and this is house, singular.
This is a dual form.
This means there are exactly two of them, and then there's a plural form, hotu, which
is going to be, or hotu, I'm not sure exactly if this is IPA or not.
I've gotten this example.
This is an old example, but anyways, it is a plural form.
So houses plural is different from there being two of them is different from there being
one of them.
This is inflectional.
We're not creating new words.
We're just giving new markings at the time of work.
Russian, for instance, uses what's called case.
We'll talk about this actually a good deal more later on, but you have something like
devushka vidit sabaku, means the girl sees the dog.
But if I change the endings here, if I change it from devushka to devushku, and I change
it from sabaku to sabaka, you have devushka, I'm sorry, you have the dog sees the girl.
So by changing those affixes, even without changing the word order, I've now changed
who's doing what to who.
This is called a case system, and we'll talk about more of that a little bit later on.
Somali has a really cool example here, and I'm not going to try and pronounce it just
because I don't know the Somali orthography.
But at the same time, you have, for instance, marking of possession on here.
So herd is this word here, probably huola or something along those lines.
And then each one of these separate forms indicates a different person is possessing
it.
Note here, though, that it changes.
Phonology.
Interesting.
And this can be used in compounding, by the way.
So if you have, for instance, marak, and then you can actually add in the head there, which
is really cool, right?
So anyways, I digress.
So we can do this kind of inflectional morphology and change things like possession, which is
great.
Spanish has all kinds of inflectional morphology.
Hablo versus hablas versus habla.
You have the conjugation tables in your life, no doubt.
Hablamos, hablais, if you're from Spain, hablan, et cetera.
This form never occurs in Mexico or, frankly, most of South America.
Anyways, it's a thing.
But all of these are different inflectional forms, and they mark both tense and they mark
person at the same exact time.
English doesn't do that much inflection, really.
It's kind of a bad language to teach morphology in.
Let's be real here.
We have a plural marking.
We have possessive marking, so like dogs and then barts, cat, or something like that.
We have comparatives and superlatives, so closer, closest.
We have verb agreement, like runs versus run, like I run, but he runs.
We have past tense.
We have past participle, chosen, et cetera, yachten, past participle of yeet.
And then present participles, so like he will be walking next weekend.
All of those are our inflectional morphemes.
That's really it.
Everything else is derivational.
We don't do that much inflection.
In fact, English is a language that has relatively little stuff tacked onto the end of words.
But anyways, so we have derivational morphology and we have inflectional morphology in the
world.
Derivational creates new words that you might use later on in the future, and inflectional
morphology just changes their meanings in predictable ways within sentences.
And most languages do a little of each of those things.
So you'll play with this a little bit more in this week's discussion section, well, actually
in this case, in this week's class session.
But still, that's what we'll be doing there.
And actually, remember I was just saying to you, remember 30 seconds ago?
Boy, I hope so.
Remember I was just saying that English actually tends to have relatively few morphemes in
a word?
Well, yeah, they differ in this way.
Languages differ a great deal, and we call this morphological type.
And this is a means of categorizing how languages are able to put words together.
So this is really useful, not because it's like one language is hard and fast, this is
this type, et cetera.
It's not useful in that so much.
It's more useful for comparing across languages.
This is what we call typology, looking across different languages and making useful comparisons.
And we're going to talk about two different dimensions.
One is, do words have lots of morphemes usually, or relatively few?
The other is, if words have multiple morphemes, do those morphemes blend together well?
Are they really kind of one chunk that has a lot of meanings, or are they very easy to
pick apart?
Are they just kind of stacked on each other?
So first off, we'll think about many morphemes versus relatively few.
If words have relatively few morphemes, like for instance, English or Mandarin Chinese
is another very, very isolating language, we call these languages isolating.
What that means is that there are individual morphemes, but they're usually kept on their
own in words.
There's not that many morphemes present here.
If you have languages that have a lot of morphemes per word, like Spanish or like German, we
call them synthetic languages.
And there are languages where whole sentences are single words, and those are often called
polysynthetic languages.
We'll talk about those later on, but in English here, let's look at this sentence.
I did see the cat on the street.
He's cute.
I did see, and then definite marker, cat on the street, all of those things are single
morphemes.
And then finally, he's is the only thing here that is a multi-morphemic word.
He's has a third person singular be attached to it.
Aside from that, all single morphemes.
This is an isolating language.
English is a pretty isolating language.
Compare this to, for instance, Russian.
In this case, you have a couple of words that are single morphemes.
For instance, tea, single morpheme.
Wow, I wrote this a little bit strangely.
That's not IPA.
Anyways, this is Cyrillic.
The saw here is going to be, that's a single chunk right there, and then noi is actually
two morphemes.
It's put together.
It's first singular and it's instrumental, but they're kind of fused together.
We can't pick them apart.
So away here, actually this second word has three morphemes.
Away, u, and then jadi is to go in an imperfective form, and then past feminine is the la, the
n.
So this is one word, but it's got three different morphemes in it.
So this is a little bit more synthetic.
Compare this to Spanish, where you have esta, where you have one big chunk here that's all
fused together, which is to be, third person singular, and then you have escribiendomelo,
where you have right, and then the gerund form, first singular, dative form.
We'll talk about what that means a little bit later on, but that means to me, first
singular dative, and then a third singular masculine accusative form.
So you are writing it to me.
You have right, ing is the gerund form here, the escribiendo, and then me is the first
person dative, to me, lo is the it.
So he or she is writing it to me.
We get two words, esta escribiendomelo.
That's good and synthetic right there.
Then Turkish.
Oh, Turkish.
Turkish is everybody's favorite example of synthesis, because it just, it's pretty, right?
So you have, each one of these words is growing.
So you see, you start off here with this, and I'm so sorry, my Turkish is terrible,
but terbiye, and then you add on all of these morphemes, one after another, until you go
from good manners to, I gather that it was from their rudeness, all in one single word.
This is a lot of synthesis.
Borderline polysynthetic, and then of course this cute example from German.
This isn't really something that would commonly be said, but this is one big word, right?
And it means the Danube Steamship Transport Electricity Head Operations Work Building
Under Officials Association.
Put together, like I said, it's mostly a joke, but it's an example of holy crap synthesis.
This is a, this is Wichita.
Wichita is a language that is, I believe to be extinct at this point.
There are no speakers of this language left alive.
But this is an example of a sentence in Wichita.
There was the big buffalo lying over there, or lying there, that is.
This entire sentence is one single word.
So this is in the category of languages we would refer to as polysynthetic.
There are many chunks in one piece.
The whole thing is one word.
This is polysynthetic.
It's incorporating things.
It's incorporating the object as well as the subject.
There's a lot more to that.
But this is a polysynthetic word.
Remember, or I'm sorry, language.
But this is always a continuum, right?
English is a very isolating language, but Mandarin is more so.
In Mandarin you very, very seldom get any morphemes in there, aside that are multi-morpheme
words that is.
Same thing with synthetic.
It's very hard to be languages like Wichita.
That's not super common, but we don't hold against them.
I mean, synthetic languages are pretty common, and most of them are not that far in the synthesis
direction, but still.
So morphological type, if a language has relatively few words, I'm sorry, morphemes per word,
it's pretty isolating.
As opposed to if the language has multiple morphemes in a word, in which case it is synthetic.
So if we want to wrap up for today, we can talk about how morphology works.
It's the study of how words are built.
And more specifically, looking at the correspondences between forms and meanings to get a sense
of what the components of those words do.
Morphology, I'm sorry, long day.
Words are made up of morphemes, and those morphemes are, well, either isolated on their
own or bound.
They are able to live on their own or they are bound to other words.
Morphemes have different types.
Words have different types.
We make words in many ways, and languages actually differ a fair amount in how they
prefer to build their words.
So okay, now we know about morphemes, we know what types that words have, we know how to
build them, and we know that different languages have different approaches to building words.
So what's next?
Sentences.
All right, thank you all very much, and I will see you on, well, I'll see you in the
next video.
Have a good day.
