Hi, everybody. Today, we're mostly going to have a little bit of fun, right? I mentioned
early on in the quarter that English is going to be the language we're going to talk about
most this quarter. But that's just because we're all speaking it, right? That's the language
of instruction. English, though, is weird, right? There's a lot going on in it. There's
a lot to unpack there, so to speak. And so today, I want to spend a little bit of time
on that. First off, a bad pun. So my goal here is just to talk a little bit about English
and exactly what makes this language just so damn weird. One thing I want to talk about,
though, is language generally speaking. I mean, language warning is a good thing to
have at the start of a linguistics class anyways, because there will be language. But the thing
is, we in this class will discuss language, and I mean all language. This may include
things that are generally speaking taboo, whether in our culture or in other cultures.
It may include words, constructions, concepts that are swears. And so all of that stuff
is there. I am meaning to further academic pursuits. But please do come talk to me if
you have any concerns. So today's topic is, put simply, go home, English, you're drunk.
Because English is a little bit crazy, and I'd like to talk about that today. So one
of the common sentiments you hear, unfortunately, more and more these days is, well, oh my God,
these immigrants, why can't they just learn English? It's easy, right? I learned it when
I was a kid. The best answer to this is, really? English? Have you looked at this language?
Because English is really difficult. For those of us who grow up speaking the language, it
doesn't feel like that much. But nearly every part of our language is completely bizarre,
and non-native speakers have already been feeling this pain. So native speakers and
non-native speakers, I want to take a moment to just talk to you about some of the strangeness
that we take for granted in the English language. So to start with, let's think about what
English must sound like from an outsider's perspective. And to this end, I give you
this song, which is kind of spectacular. This was created by an Italian comedy show to talk
about what English sounds like to other people.
This was created by an Italian comedy show to talk about what English sounds like to
other people.
This is weird, right? And for most English speakers, it's super weird, because it feels
Englishy, right? It's using English phonology. It's using English prosody. It sounds super-duper
Englishy, except it isn't at all. And so this is a really cool little clip here, and it
gives us a sense of looking in at the language from outside, which is something that's very
hard to do, generally speaking. So it's just fun. I encourage you, put this on your phone
and then just start playing it over the Bluetooth at a party. People will get so weirded out,
it's amazing.
So okay, that actually gives us a nice entryway into the sound system. So to start with, we
should talk about the English R, because really, very, very few languages use the English R
style sound. Mandarin Chinese is actually a language that shares this particular crazy.
But there are a bunch of different ways to make the English R. In fact, a study here,
Mark Teedy and some colleagues in 2004, used MRI and ultrasound to figure out that there
were a bunch of different approaches for making the English R. All of these are sagittal sections.
So here, lips, back of the mouth, lips, back of the mouth, lips, back of the mouth. All
of these are different people producing a sound that everybody heard as purr, urr, urr.
And so there are so many different tongue shapes possible for producing exactly the
same acoustic thing. And you might be thinking, okay, that's kind of weird, right? Because
for most things, like stop, ta, ta, ta, there are only a couple of acceptable tongues, but
the R, you can do damn near anything with it. And as long as it sounds roughly like
you would expect an R2, we're okay with it.
So the English R is very, very strange, and it can be made in many different ways, depending
on who you are. This is part of the reason why it's so hard for kids, right? A lot of
kids struggle with this, because it's just like you have to find one that kind of works
for you, right? So the English R is absolutely bizarre. Most people around the world, for
a rhotic sound, for an R-like sound, will have something like a-ra, a-ra, the equivalent
of the English tap, or an a-ra, a-ra, an alveolar trill, or maybe a uvular trill. But this one
that we do, super weird.
Intonation is another thing that's really important in English. And this is basically
the timing and the volume and the timing of the pitch of your voice. I'm sorry, the volume
of the voice and the timing of the pitch of your voice. So where you have little peaks,
you have little falls. So for instance, take this sentence right here. I had five guys
for lunch yesterday. If you read that, most people are going to think, oh, you went to
the five guys burger chain for lunch yesterday. I had five guys for lunch yesterday. It's
important to separate out this five guys bit a little bit, because if you say it otherwise,
I had five guys for lunch yesterday, suddenly you're a cannibal. This is a little tiny distinction,
but it's a really important one, right? If you don't chunk this properly, if you don't
time this properly, I had five guys for lunch yesterday. I had five guys for lunch yesterday.
And you say instead, I had five guys for lunch yesterday. Suddenly you're a cannibal, right?
Or speaking of cannibalism, let's eat grandma. Oh, I'm sorry, there's a comma there. Let's
eat grandma. And so that prosody, that little difference there turns out to be super important.
Similarly, emotion is carried very heavily in prosody. So I could say something to somebody
like, I'm so sorry to hear about your exam score. And I mean it. I mean, seriously, it's
a misconception that professors, you know, like, ah, you failed. Maybe some are, but
for me, it really is genuinely sad there. So I would say, I'm so sorry to hear about
your exam score. If I said, I am so sorry to hear about your exam score. The only thing
that's different there is the prosody, the pitch, the timing, and to an extent, the gesture
there was a thing too. And then here's a really good way to troll your friends, family and
roommates. Next time you're giving a grocery list. So you might say something like, hey,
I need you to go to the store and I need you to pick up some apples, broccoli, bottled
water, doughnuts and bread. And then stop. Because what I did there is I didn't end the
list properly. What you're supposed to do is fall at the end. You're supposed to say
apples, doughnuts, broccoli, and bread and bread falling down at the end there. If you
don't give that and you say, and bread, they wait and they wait and they wait and they
wait and they wait. And then when you, when they ask, you're like, aren't you going to
finish the list? You just say, I did like, no, you didn't. Yeah, I did. I said, and bread
and it'll, it'll cause them trouble. So play with this. Use list intonation. It's really,
really fun for messing with people. There's so much joy there. Frankly, messing this up
generally is just a great deal of joy. Generally. Okay. So that's intonation. That's phonetics.
The English R is weird and intonation is weird everywhere, but we're really good at making
it weird, right? Vocabulary is another area where things are fun. So English has done
a bunch of stealing words from other people. Last time when we were talking about in morphology,
we talked about borrowings. We talked about just taking words wholesale from other languages
and English really, really likes doing this. So, um, one good example of this is from French.
This here is the same text in English and in French. And I've put in italics, every
word in this sentence that was borrowed straight from French, where we can see exactly where
it was taken from. So for instance, human right here, uh, for, uh, equal equal over
here, dignity, dignity, et cetera. And my French is bad enough that I'm not going to
try and do those things together. But nonetheless, we see that a bunch of these words that show
up from in English here are actually taken directly from the French. This is a little
unusual. Actually, it's not unusual around the world, but it's counterintuitive to some
people because we say, well, English is a Germanic language and it is the language family
that English is from is Germanic. Fundamentally, more parts of our grammar, more parts of our
vocabulary come from the German line of things than from the Romance and then from the Latin
line of things. Uh, France, uh, French is a Romance language, although both of them
share a greater ancestor, the Indo-European language family. We'll talk more about what
that means later on, but we see still that English has borrowed a bunch of words directly
from French. A large chunk of English is French in origin here. And in fact, there are places
where we borrowed a word, but it doesn't mean the same thing anymore. Let's look at the
very last word here, brotherhood in English, and then fraternity in French. Um, so what's
interesting is we have both these words. We have brotherhood, which is a good old fashioned
Germanic word, and then we have fraternity. But in one case, brotherhood has sort of the
meaning here, right? Um, but fraternity means something a little bit different. It's similar
to a brotherhood, but here it means a social organization. And at least historically it
has been a male social organization. Um, and so it's not quite fair to say I'm, uh, if
you say, uh, I am in the Lambda, the Angma, Sigma, uh, fraternity, I know Angma is not
Greek. Um, I'm in that brotherhood. That doesn't make sense. You would generally say I'm in
a fraternity. At least that's the best of my knowledge. That's not a culture I have.
Um, but nonetheless, we see that both fraternity and brotherhood have been borrowed into English,
but they mean different things, even though in French they translate pretty directly.
So, um, interesting, right? So there's a lot of French in English. And actually this brings
us to the idea of purity of English. Every so often this comes up. And again, this is
very often just like, well, let's see here. I can't call this person impure, so I'm going
to call their language impure. Right? Um, and so people are like, Oh, speak English.
Um, in practice, English is my, like many languages around the world, English has large,
large chunks of other languages inside of it. The, the, the joke is we don't just borrow
words. On occasion, English has pursued other languages down alleyways to beat them unconscious
and rifle their pockets for new vocabulary. Yeah, that, that, that's, that, that sounds
about right. So next time you're in a dark alleyway, um, keep an eye out for English.
Um, so, but the thing is, this is true. No, no language is an island. All languages around
the world by and large will have borrowings from other languages. Maybe they're very old,
but it's a super common thing. Most languages borrow some terms from elsewhere, but English
is absolutely a thug. It steals a bunch of words. And by the way, thug is a loan word
from Hindi. Um, so there you go. English writing system. I've talked about the English writing
system before. It's problematic. I mean, this whole A E O U and sometimes Y thing. No, absolutely
not. But how about this little creature right here? This is a fish. Um, and in fact that
up there, that, that says fish G O G H O T I spells fish in the English language. Uh,
so the G H in rough, so F as in rough, uh, O from women. So the I in women, and then
the, uh, T from actor of the T I that is from action. So F I S H fish. So G O G H O T I
spells fish plausibly in English. And so I encourage you to use that on a pretty regular
basis. Speaking of this, look at this little dude. This is a knight. English has spelled
this interestingly, right? Um, technically, uh, well, I mean it's pronounced night, right?
There's no K, there's no G, there's no H. It's just an I or an N and then an I and then
a T right? But this used to make sense. English used to pronounce this word. Kniht, Kniht,
Kniht. And in that case, there was a K there and there was a K there. And so Kniht made
a lot more sense. So we standardized the spelling back when it was called Kniht. Uh, and we
didn't bother changing it when it became Knight. And so as a result, we have all of
these words or like Knight as in, Hey, it's night out. It's not, um, which would be Kniht,
right? Um, and so all of these things are old. These are very old words, but our writing
system hasn't changed. And then we're using these sounds to do silly things in the rest
of the language, right? Um, so we have something called ablout in English where we change our
vowels to change their past tense, right? So, um, for instance, sing is a verb and we
put it in past tense. It's not singed as we might expect using the past tense inflectional
morphology we're used to. Instead, we have sang. So we change that rather than by adding
a morpheme, we change the stem itself in what's called ablout. So sing becomes sang. And then
ring becomes rang as in you rang the bell yesterday. Uh, bring though becomes brought.
And in fact, I got yelled at in third grade for saying brang. And it was like, dude, it's
not bringed, which would be normal. I didn't say this at the time. It's not bring that
would be normal and it's not brang, which would also be normal through this ablout rule.
Then we do this. Then we do brought where for some reason we add a T in there and then
sting becomes stung, not stang or stot for some damn reason. But then ding becomes dinged,
right? Yeah. This is really weird, right? And so let's imagine for instance, uh, that
I gave you a new verb, which is to, to throw a remote at somebody to express your displeasure
at their academic integrity violations. Um, and that would be called to ning them for
some reason. Um, what would the past tense of that be? Think about it for a second. If
the verb ning means something new, what would its past tense be? So plausibly it could be
nang, could be not, could be nung, or it could be ninged. And for most people, uh,
by and large, uh, they're actually going to choose ninged, which is really weird, right?
So we have all these possible forms, but for new words, we'll often use the most regular
version. Um, then we get weird things like smite and smote, which actually some English
speakers don't even recognize as being the same thing, right? Um, and given most people
don't talk about smiting generally speaking, but you know, if you're a D and D person,
maybe, right? Um, and bite though becomes bit, right? I smote the night, the knicht
yesterday, um, but the mosquito bit me. It didn't boat me, which would be a little weird.
Um, and thus yeet of course, uh, should be yote, I would argue, and its participle should
be yachten. So anyways, our, our past tense forms are really bizarre and I don't know
why we're okay with this. Prepositions are also very strange. In fact, it's argued that
very often prepositions are one of the hardest things for second language learners to pick
up in a new language like English. So for instance, I could say, I've got a conference
at the price center. I could say, I've got a conference in the price center. Those two
things are generally equivalent to most English speakers. It might make more sense if the
conference was at the price center, if it was outdoors or something like that, but you
can swap those back and forth pretty clearly. But I couldn't say I've got a conference at
Indiana. It would make sense if I meant the university. If you say, Oh, I'm going to Stanford
university, I'm going to Stanford, I'm going to, um, UC Berkeley, I'm going to, um, I'm sorry,
UCB apparently is the new main name for them. Uh, and then I'm, I'm going to Indiana university,
uh, or the university of Indiana. I don't know which, um, and I've got a conference at Indiana.
Then it makes sense. But if it's just the state, I've got a conference at Indiana. Doesn't make
sense. I've got a conference at Indianapolis. Eh, kind of, for me, that's kind of questionable.
I've got a conference at the Marriott in Indianapolis. That's okay though. But I couldn't
say at the Marriott at Indianapolis, unless the name of the, uh, the hotel was the Marriott at
Indianapolis, in which case that's okay. Um, and so this is very, very strange and we can keep
playing with this, right? I've got a meeting on Friday, perfectly reasonable for most English
speakers. I've got a meeting in August. Again, that's perfectly reasonable. Although Friday and
August are both time durations. So why is one in and one's on? I've got a meeting at 3 p.m.,
but I couldn't say, for instance, I've got a meeting at Friday or I've got a meeting in Friday.
I couldn't say that I've got a meeting on August or at August. And I couldn't say I've got a
meeting on 3 p.m. or in 3 p.m. None of those things work. So these prepositions are specific
to days, months, and times. I've got a meeting during lunch, but I couldn't say I've got a
meeting on lunch, in lunch, or at lunch. Actually, I've got a meeting at lunch. That means that
lunch is elsewhere, I think, for most English speakers, which is very strange. Um, and you can
say I've got a meeting next week, but it would be weird to say I've got a meeting on next week,
in next week, at next week. I've got a meeting during next week means that it lasts the entire
meeting, right? This is hard. As a native speaker, you might have intuitions about this,
and as a non-native speaker, you've probably started to develop these intuitions, if not
finished. But this is really, really tricky. So prepositions are hard, and it's really difficult
to explain just how crazy they are. So am I getting my point to you? Am I getting my point
through to you? Am I getting my point by you? Am I getting it across to you? All of these things
are plausible, right? I'm no good at, when, or for explaining these things in, at, or through
lectures, each of which are going to have subtle little gradations, but you would understand all
of them. So prepositions are really, really difficult. Plurality. So back to the goatee
over here. I'm sorry, the fish. Um, this fish here, there is one of them, right? If I add two
of them, these are fish. Technically, this is true. The plural of fish is fish. However, these are
fishes. Because apparently, and I learned this from somebody at an aquarium, so this must be
accurate. If you have multiple fish of the same species, you have two fish. But if you have
multiple fish of different species, if you have two fish of different species, because here I've
got a tetra here, and I've got a, um, a ram, um, a cichlid here, a Bolivian ram, these are two
different fishes, right? So yeah, fish or fishes, depending on that. And then we can think about the
other weird plurals, right? So you get leaf goes to leaves, rather than leafs, which would make
sense. Even though we have beliefs, not believes. Um, wife becomes wives, um, for some reason. Um,
staff. Okay, what is staff? Where does staff go? Think about this for a second. The word staff
is the plural of staff, staffs, rhyming with gravs. Um, with gravs, wow, you can tell I'm
broken. Um, stavs rhyming with cavs, staves rhyming with caves, or stife. Why not, right?
So think about that for a second while I take a drink of water.
So interestingly, um, people are going to have different answers. Uh, usually if you've got a
staff of a department, so for instance, the linguistics department staff and the economics
department staff all got together, both staffs were really happy. Most people will go with
staffs here. And it's usually going to have the voiceless version, staffs rather than stavs.
That would be a little weird, right? Um, yet if you have staves, if you have multiple, uh,
walking sticks, very often people will use the word staves for those. Um, and this is, uh, yeah,
so this has been carried through actually. A lot of people, uh, in the tarot actually is one place
where this word remains. And so people don't even make the connection that staves could be the
plural of staff, uh, because historically it was, and this is obviously an old art form, right?
So, um, mouse becomes mice in plural, right? Cool. Um, louse becomes lice. Cool. Okay, I see the
pattern. House then must become heis, right? And then spouse, well, I guess polygamy adds spice to
life. Yeah, that was terrible. And by the way, I'm not advocating for or against any relationship
structure. Have fun. But nonetheless, um, count or mass nouns cause us another bit of pain here.
Putting aside plurality, let's think about this distinction here. And this might be another thing
that you're not quite familiar with, but you use every day, right? So car, car is something you
count. I have a car, or maybe you have two cars, or maybe you have three cars, or maybe you're Jay
Leno and you have 50 cars. Either way, it could be a thing, but you could say, I have a car.
This is a count noun. I have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 cars. Um, you would not say I have a sand. Even if you
have sand, you would not say I have a sand here. That's not a thing, right? This is a mass noun.
Instead, if you end up with some sand, for instance, here is some sand. I have some sand.
You would have to say that, right? Um, so sand is a mass noun. Asparagus, interestingly enough,
is a count noun, right? I can't, I'm sorry, is a mass noun. You can't say I ate an asparagus.
It doesn't quite work that way. You want this to be plural somehow. You would want like an
asparagus or something like that. Yet French fries and asparagus aren't so different. They're often
found in multiples. And I can say I ate a French fry because French fries are a count noun, not a
mass noun. But the funny thing is that count nouns can be treated like mass nouns. So for instance,
I can say I saw a raccoon on the road. And that just means, oh, yeah, I was on the road and I saw
a raccoon over there or something like that. Or even I saw a raccoon run across the road. That's
fine. I saw some raccoons on the road. That's perfectly reasonable because you're saying
there were a number of raccoons. How many of them? I don't know. But there were more than one,
probably less than 50 or something like that, because I probably would have said I saw a bunch
of raccoons, something like that. But if I change this into a mass noun, I saw some raccoon on the
road. For most English speakers, this now feels like this is roadkill, right? This feels like the
raccoon was hit and there were remains of the raccoon on the road there. And so just changing
from count to mass can have a very strong effect. And by the way, you can do this too with other
things, right? So if I say I have, I'm sorry, I have some sand, that's perfectly reasonable, right?
This is one kind of sand, actually. But if I had multiple kinds of sand, if I had white sand and
then red sand, then I could say I have some sands or I have two sands. I have white and red, right?
So those become sands and that then becomes a count noun, even though sand itself is a mass noun.
It gets to be a thing, right? And speaking of dead animals, I have cow with English. Actually,
wait, no, that doesn't work. I have to say I have beef with English because that's a different thing.
Cow and beef are different. But actually, let's think about that. What did you have for dinner?
I had cow for dinner. Does that make sense? I'm a vegetarian, so it doesn't make sense. But, you
know, that's because I wouldn't say it. But still, somebody could say I had beef for dinner. There's
no problem there. But if you say, what did you have for dinner? I had cow. That's usually funky
to people, right? What did you have for dinner? I had pig. Again, that has the usual funkiness.
You want that to be pork, generally speaking. The exception being, of course, that if you do
like a pig roast event where you roast an entire pig, that's not a pork roast. So pig is the
creature, pork is the food. I had deer for dinner is kind of okay because some people don't know
the term venison, which is the food term for deer. I had sheep. Sheep is weird because we have mutton.
Again, so you could say I had sheep, I had deer, but usually you would say I had venison for dinner.
I had mutton for dinner. But lamb is actually okay, right? You would say lamb either way.
You wouldn't necessarily go there. And I had chicken is always chicken, right? It's not the
case that there is a chicken over there and then there is something different on my plate. It's not
the case, although I guess chicken tender. You would never call a chicken a tender. I guess you
could. A little dark. Let's be real. But the cool thing about this then is that animals themselves
are count nouns. So like for instance, I hugged three pigs. That's perfectly cogent. I ate three
porks. No, you need to use some descriptor of it. You'd need to say something like I ate three
pieces of pork or I ate three chops of pork or steaks of pork. I think steak is beef. Either
way. Look, I did. I'm trying over here. I bought some cows. Perfectly reasonable. I bought some
beef. Also perfectly reasonable. But you couldn't say I bought some beaves or beefs. I think that's
beefs because why would we pluralize English? And I have several beefs with Michael Bay. This is a
thing, right? And so anyways, this is difficult. This is yet another difficult thing that we've
picked up on and that doesn't even bother most native speakers and frankly most experienced
speakers of the language, but is really, really difficult. This brings us to affixes. We talked
about these already during morphology. We've got lots of prefixes and suffixes. We've got suffixes
like I, right? I is as in iPhone or iPad or iMac, iDoc. I actually saw iBrader at one point in time,
which yeah, is a thing. Sauce, for instance, as in sad sauce, awesome sauce. Vsauce is a popular
YouTuber, right? But it's weird to use it with some other words. For instance, oh wow, that paper
was concise sauce. Generally not as good or oh stop being pedantic sauce. Doesn't work that way.
So sauce is another weird affix that we've developed here. Holic and holism is interesting
because it originally came from alcoholic, right? So you have alcohol and then somebody and then
ick, somebody with a problem with it. But we decided that we weren't going to just use the
ick. It wouldn't make sense to call somebody a chocolate ick because no. And we see this
ick elsewhere, by the way, with like a heretic is somebody who does heresy, right? But the ick here,
we decided no, that's not enough. So we borrowed a holic. So you end up with chocoholic or workaholic.
And you can keep doing this, right? You could say, oh, she's an enchilada holic, right? And it's
productive. It makes sense. We can keep using it. But it gets a little weird with like, oh,
I really like phonology. I'm a phonologaholic. Does that work? Are you okay with that?
Either way, it's a thing. So holic has been borrowed in its whole form, even though actually
what we're borrowing is a larger chunk of an existing word than the original morpheme, which
was just ick. And then we have questions about what affixes attached to what words, which is
interesting. So if we think about all of these various derivational affixes, we can go calm.
We can say calmly. That's fine. Uncalm doesn't generally work as well. Calm-ish, yeah, things
were calm-ish at home. It can be a verb, to calm. And calmify doesn't quite work. But for happy,
it's a different set. Because happily works, unhappy works, happy-ish works. But you can't
happy somebody. Like, oh, don't be sad. I'll do my best to happy you. And hapify, not a thing.
Sweet is fine. Sweetly works. Unsweet, no. Although actually, unsweet is a thing when
you have sweet tea. This is usually the case in the American South. Sweet tea is a thing.
And then you can ask for unsweet tea, apparently. Although unsweetened is how it's usually said,
at least around these parts. Sweet-ish is fine, which is different from sweet-ish, of course.
But you can't sweet something. Like, oh, I took the tea and sweeted it. Nope. And that wouldn't
be considered a form of sweetification. Quiet. Quietly is fine. Unquiet. Although you could
maybe say, oh, my stomach was unquiet after eating at Taco Bell last night or something like that.
Quiet-ish. You can quiet somebody, but you can't quietify them. Evil. Evilly works. Unevil. Oh,
that wasn't unevil. I guess evil-ish. A little closer. You can't evil something, but you can
probably evilify them. Maybe, right? Like, oh, you know, his adverse experiences during childhood
evilified him. I don't know. Linguistically, totally fine. Unlinguistic. Linguistic-ish,
yeah? But I can't linguistic something, and I can't linguisticify it. Linguisticify?
Linguisticify? I'm not even sure how the prosody would go there. But either way,
not all affix is attached to all words, and this is very hard to predict, right? So if you are not
a native speaker of the language and you know that unexists, you've got two words here that
would work. But it's hard to tell why. You get more into this in morphology. And the meanings,
by the way, can be very odd. So, for instance, I could say, John works at Art of Espresso.
He's a coffee grinder. Not really, right? Because a coffee grinder is a thing,
right? Not a human who runs the machine. So even if somebody all day grinds coffee,
you wouldn't want to say that they are a coffee grinder, because that's a separate thing. A
coffee grinder is a machine, right? Mark has retired three times in a row. He's a serial
retirer. Does that work? Kind of? I'm not even 100% sure. Like, it kind of works, but it also
could mean that he's a person that retires people. Like, you know, for cost-cutting measures, okay,
you're retired now. You could be a retirer. I don't know. I just downloaded a new YouTube app.
It's a great YouTuber. So it's still using the "-er"- suffix, right? Which means you're the
agent doing something, but a YouTube app is not a YouTuber. Instead, you have to be somebody who
actually produces content for YouTube to be considered a YouTuber. Mark builds armor, so
he's an armorer. But if Stephen builds hooks, he is not a hooker, according to most English speakers,
because hooker means something entirely different. So that's interesting. We have all of these
various affixes. They can and can't attach in different places, and it's really hard to predict
which ones attach when. There's one infix, though, in English, and only one infix. And an infix,
as you recall, is an affix that is inserted into the middle of the word. Will I tell you what
infix that is? Abso-fucking-lutely, I will. Infix, the only infix that English has is the word
fucking. We can use that as an infix anywhere in the English language, and it's the only one that
we've got. And there are very, very strict rules as to where it goes. A lot of people think, oh,
this is slang, or this is swearing. There are no rules anymore. There's no grammar. This is just
somebody misbehaving. Oh, clutching the pearls. But in reality, no. This is very much a part of
the grammar. Because, work with me here. Constitutional is a word. Add the fucking
infix to it. Yes, you know what I mean. Would it be A, cons-fucking-titutional, B,
consta-fucking-tutional, C, consta-too-fucking-tional, or D, constitution-fucking-al?
Think about it for a second.
The vast, vast, overwhelming majority of speakers will give you B, consta-fucking-tutional. That is
not consta-fucking-tutional. As opposed to consta-too-fucking-tional, which is actually
hard for me to say it's that difficult. So this is the only correct answer. And in fact, expletives,
and because you can actually use other things that are sort of standing in for the F-bomb here,
so you could do something like consta-freaking-tutional, but they must occur immediately
prior to the stressed syllable in English. That is the only place where those are able to be added
in there. So it has to be miss-a-fucking-sippy, not miss-fucking-sis-sippy. That doesn't even
work. Or he's a de-on-fucking-tologist, because it's de-on-tologist. The main stress point is on
the tologist, so it has to be de-on-fucking-tologist. This has probably not been said before, but you
have strong intuitions as to what it would be. Anti-disestablishment-fucking-tarianism
is exactly where that needs to go, and nowhere else in that word. So this is very interesting.
This feels like it should be, you know, oh my god, all bets are off, he's swearing in class,
oh my god. But in reality, what we have happening here is just grammar. And it's an important part
of the grammar, and it's an interesting part of the grammar, even in the middle of this fucking
infix, right? So let's talk a little bit more about these issues. In fact, you could say
it's time to talk a little bit more about these issues. So what is it there anyways? It's time?
So if I could say something like it ate my homework, what does that mean?
Chances are it means like my dog ate my homework, or my cat ate my homework, or maybe my three-toed
sloth ate my homework. I don't know. But nonetheless, it's something that is not given a he-she
role, generally speaking, or they in English. So you would get something like, it would be weird
if I said it ate my homework and I meant my wife, and that'd be weird for like a bunch of
different reasons. But nonetheless, it ate my homework is, generally speaking, some kind of
animate creature, but not animate enough to get a he-she or they. It's hot in there, or it's
getting hot in here. Does that refer to something? It's getting hot in here? Would that mean like
the air is getting hot in here? Or the weather is getting hot in here? No, it's just it, right?
It burns when I eat habaneros. So there are two possible things that this could be. The main one,
of course, being your mouth. And your mouth burns when I eat habaneros. But at the same time,
you could say it hurts. You could do something maybe a little bit wider. For instance, you could
just say it aches all over if you are, you know, having a flu or something and your body is just
aching, generally speaking. It sucks when Michael Bay remakes your childhood favorites. What is the
it there? Could it be your life? Yeah, probably. And it's about time we fix our writing system.
This one makes no sense at all. There is no conceivable referent for this. Pardon me.
So we go from at the very top there, having a strong referent, probably the dog,
to having a conceivable referent, it's getting hot in here, to having a two referents possible,
having something that's really hard to define and something that just cannot be defined.
This is called an expletive it in English. It contributes nothing to the meaning of the
sentence, but it does serve a syntactic role. It jumps in there and it takes on a syntactic role
in the sentence. It is the subject for sentences where there would be no subject at all.
It's hot in here. Well, what is hot in here? It'd be weird to say the air is hot in here.
The room is hot in here. So we just give it an it there or it's time we do this.
There's nothing else I could put there. So we just put it right. And so shouldn't we do something
about that? Which, by the way, actually means the same thing as should we do something about that?
If you walk up to somebody and say those two things, it would mean the same thing,
even though one of them is negated and one of them isn't, which, yeah, go home, English,
you're drunk. And by the way, that should be drinked. Just saying. So I give up.
Speaking of which, that brings us to phrasal verbs or verb particle constructions here.
A verb particle construction is when a verb has a different meaning coupled with a particular
preposition or particle. So, for instance, I give up is different than I'm giving. Like,
for instance, if you bought the movie Up for somebody on DVD, because this is 2000,
and you gave it to them, you wouldn't say I gave up for their birthday. That'd be weird,
right? That's a different thing. I gave up for their birthday. So anyways, these are when a verb
has a different meaning. So let's think about the verb cut, right? Cut generally means like
to slice something or to use scissors. You are using some kind of an object to part material,
right? But let's put it with different prepositions. To cut somebody in is to offer
them a part of a venture, right? You know, my wife and I are smuggling cheese into Canada.
We're not. That's not a that's not a thing. Although we met a cheese smuggler in Missoula
once. Anyways, I digress. No, that was Kalispell. Either way, Montana, right up by Canada. Apparently
cheese is cheaper here than in Canada. Anyways, I digress. To cut somebody in is to offer them
a part of a venture. Usually it's an illicit venture, but it's a thing. Why did I go to cheese
smuggling? OK, cut out is to stop something, to remove somebody from the venture or to lose audio.
So in the Zoom world, right? Oh, you're cutting out. I'm sorry. I can't hear you.
There's no actual cutting, right? Or I could say to somebody, hey, cut it out. I'm trying to teach
over here. Or you could cut somebody out of the venture in the same way that you could cut them in,
right? Don't cut me out of your business. To cut with is to adulterate a drug, to take something
that already exists and then mix in something else to make it less. Well, basically to have more of
it to sell, I guess. Look, I'm not a very good drug dealer, OK? I'm not a drug dealer at all.
But as by definition, I'm also not a good one. Maybe I am a good one. I just don't know. Anyways,
by moving on, let's not find out, right? I would break bad very poorly. Cutting off back at the
ranch, cutting off is to cease financial support or to merge, leaving too little space. Both of
those things are meaningful points. So you can cut somebody off on the highway or you can cut
somebody off and stop giving them money for tuition. Or you can also remove a smaller part
than a whole. Like, for instance, oh, do you want this brownie? Oh, yeah. Cut me off a piece.
It just means take a little bit there. And by the way, cut off means that, you know,
if the brownie is this big, you wouldn't cut off a piece that is this big, right? You would cut
off something small. If you're doing the main part, then you're cutting the main thing and
you're cutting off this little bit here, which is weird independently. To cut it is to suffice
for a task like, oh, yeah, this remote isn't perfect, but it cuts it. And even that's a
little weird, right? This will cut it for the job, but it cuts it. Yeah, I guess. English is hard,
right? And we can keep going. To cut something up is to slice it into little pieces, right? To cut
something down is to shorten it. Like, I've got a piece of rope, but I need to cut it down so it
fits better. To cut across is to go through an open space. Like, oh, I cut across the field,
so I got here quicker. To cut on is to just kind of cut on something, like you're sitting there
bored in a Zoom call and just like cutting on a piece of paper because you happen to have scissors
and a piece of paper you don't care about. And so you're just cutting on a piece of paper, right?
That could be a thing. To cut back is to reduce an existing option or investment. Like, oh, I should
cut back on real estate. Or maybe you should cut. I'm not a financial advisor either. I'm not many
things today, right? Or you can cut back to travel into a story. Let's cut back to morphology real
quick and talk about infixes. So all of these things are different possible meanings of the
verb to cut, and it depends on the preposition they're attached to. And this isn't easy to
predict, right? Because if cut up means slice into small pieces, then to cut down, that makes no sense
at all because that's not upwards and this isn't downwards, right? Yeah, I don't know. And sometimes
we don't know if we want the verb particle construction or the preposition. So for instance,
I could say cut up the center of the fabric, and I could mean this. I could mean just go right up
the center and cut. Or I could mean cut up the center of the fabric as in you just go to town
on the inside of that fabric there, and you would end up with a fabric center that is cut up. Both
of those things are plausible meanings of the exact same sentence because it's hard to tell
whether you want the preposition there or the verb particle construction, which is cool, right? And so
these differences can have major consequences. I could say something like Jackie stole my lunchbox
and then she threw my lunch up on the roof. What this means generally speaking to most English
speakers is they've got the lunchbox there and then they just yeet, throw it up onto the roof,
and it's up there someplace now. As opposed to if we swap the ordering here and we say,
then she threw up my lunch on the roof. That generally means that Jackie ate the lunch
and then the lunch didn't stay around. And so she went up on the roof and threw up. So changing the
ordering of those prepositions changes it from being a preposition construction where the throwing
goes upwards to being a verb particle construction where you throw up the lunch. Different. Neat. Fun.
And we have lots of other things like to and to go. Syntacticians are really, they struggle
with what this is. And a bunch of people will ask me, right, there are clearly cases where you have
to as a preposition, right? Like where are you going? I'm going to Boston. There it's very,
very clearly a prepositional meaning, right? There's no problem there. But in cases like to
go, as in, I want to go to the park, this is really hard to say. Giving it a part of speech
in the sense that we talked about last time is damn near impossible. So syntacticians who are
generally the folks who are most invested in parts of speech, because again, these are functional
roles that words have in sentences, they've punted. They just call it a particle. It's just to,
okay, we're good. And so the to and to go is just a particle these days. That's all.
And computational linguistics, we actually call it just to. We wash our hands of it. We're just
like, you know what? It's to, we don't care. We don't care. We don't care. Just label it to,
and we'll put it over there. We don't want to deal with that. So to is very, very difficult.
And either way, it causes a lot of problems for us. Like it, by the way, which here actually had
a referent, but in other cases doesn't. And then there's the really crazy stuff. For instance,
this sentence right here, um, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo,
Buffalo. Um, this is a fully grammatical sentence in the English language. It absolutely works. Um,
and it includes, it involves three different meanings, Buffalo, New York, which is a place,
the animal, the Buffalo, and then the verb, which is to Buffalo somebody or to bully them,
to push them around. So we can read this in the following way. New York bison whom other New York
bison bully themselves, bully New York bison. So I could say Buffalo, Buffalo, um, Buffalo,
Buffalo, Buffalo up to the bully part, Buffalo. Uh, um, Oh, come on. Buffalo. How did I just
forget the word? There is literally one word here. I'm having trouble with the prosody. So it would
be Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo, Buffalo. There we go.
I think I might've thrown an extra Buffalo in there. Look, this is difficult, but it's
grammatical. It works. Um, I know I'm surprised too, but the thing about this is that it's not
just English. I mean, English is absolutely insane. If we sit back and we think about it,
Oh my God, this language is, it's a situation. It's a thing. Um, but it is filled with
irregularities. It's filled with weirdnesses with odd constructions, with borrowings and
lots of other silliness. English is very much in debt to its past, right? There is a lot of
old stuff. There's a lot of cruft sitting around in the English language that people are having a
little bit of trouble with. Uh, and that's, that's okay, but it's no different than any
other language. And that's the other important thing to take away from this. I'm not just
beating up on English because it's weird. I'm beating up on every language because it's weird,
but it's really important that we realize that all languages are completely crazy.
And when we talk about languages in class, we are simplifying things left and right for this class
for one-on-one. We are really focused on trying to make these things seem at least slightly
tractable, tractable, right? We're really hoping that you'll look at language and go, that's really
cool rather than just run screaming. Um, and so the reason that we're doing some of this
simplification is just to make the main concepts we're talking about clearer. And then as you go
forth as a linguist in your life, you will learn more about the language. You'll go like, okay,
yeah, this is mostly true, except there are a couple of exceptions off to the side here.
And then there's this thing here that doesn't quite work, but for the most part, this is a
true generalization. So we're giving you the generalizations and we're kind of hiding some
of that just because we don't have the time. And because like I said, we don't want you running
screaming. Um, I've been beating up by the way on the English writing system, but Tibetan is way
worse. Um, the Tibetan writing system is beautiful. Absolutely gorgeous writing system. Love it to
death. Absolutely nothing like the language itself. Um, no. So the Tibetan writing system
is way worse than the English writing system in terms of it was standardized way earlier,
or the Russian case system. Remember we talked about it the other day with these nice two little
affixes? Nope. Nominative, accusative, and then all this other stuff. It's brutal. Um, and then
Spanish. Oh God, Spanish. I gave you that cute little, Oh look, inflectional morphology. And
then I gave you this little part. Yeah. Spanish has a lot of conjugations. It's a thing. Anytime
that you have to sell books there, there is this book that I think many of you might be familiar
with. Um, if you learn Spanish in the U S 501 Spanish verb conjugations, or it is just a bunch
of tables showing this because there's a lot of really unusual stuff that goes on with these. And
it just makes it much easier to learn it in this particular way, because maybe you're not a native
speaker. So all of these languages are crazy. And this craziness is why we linguists love languages
so very, very much. So go wrapping up English is just bat poop, cray cray in absolutely a bunch of
ways, not the least of which because you understood that sentence, but so is every other language.
And that's why we love them. And remember that second language learners of any language are
fighting an uphill battle. It is not easy. So always, always, always be kind because,
Oh my God, it's a battle. Thank you very much, everybody. And I will see you next time.
